

===== PAGE 1 / 16 =====

Reliable and Conﬁgurable Process Simulations 
via Probabilistic White-Box Models 
Francesco Vinci1(B), Gyunam Park2,3, Wil M. P . van der Aalst2,4, 
and Massimiliano de Leoni 1 
1 University of Padua, Padua, Italy 
francesco.vinci.1@phd.unipd.it, deleoni@math.unipd.it 
2 Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology (FIT), Sankt Augustin, Germany 
g.park@tue.nl 
3 Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands 
4 Process and Data Science, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 
wvdaalst@pads.rwth-aachen.de 
Abstract. Business process simulation (BPS) has emerged as a crucial tool that 
offers a risk-free virtual environment to analyze, test, and optimize complex ser-
vice compositions and orchestrations in cloud and edge computing environments. 
BPS enables the evaluation of alternative scenarios (a.k.a. “what-if” scenarios) by 
capturing the dynamic behavior of service interactions, including control-ﬂow, 
task durations, and resource utilization. Several techniques to discover BPS mod-
els employ black-box predictors to characterize the run-time simulation aspects. 
The downside of these approaches is that the rules guiding the predictors cannot 
be provided in an intelligible form. This means that service architects and process 
analysts cannot modify or explore the decision-making logic that drives service 
orchestration and composition in these simulations. Moreover, these models are 
often deterministic and thus unable to capture uncertainty, which is essential to 
realistically simulate dynamic environments. This paper presents white-box pre-
dictors based on probabilistic decision trees, which are intelligible and easy to 
conﬁgure. The experiments show that white-box predictors can improve the sim-
ulation accuracy and variability, while being naturally intelligible. 
Keywords: Business Process Simulation · Service Composition · Machine 
Learning · Explainable AI · Probabilistic Decision Trees 
1 Introduction 
Service-oriented business processes have become the backbone of modern enterprise 
architectures, where complex workﬂows are executed through the composition and 
orchestration of distributed services [ 11]. In cloud and edge computing environments, 
these processes typically coordinate multiple external services, microservices, and APIs 
to deliver end-to-end business functionality. The dynamic nature of such architectures 
poses signiﬁcant challenges in understanding and predicting process behavior [ 21]. 
Business process simulation (BPS) has emerged as a key tool in service-oriented 
computing, offering a risk-free virtual environment to analyze, test, and improve service 
c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2026 
M. Aiello et al. (Eds.): ICSOC 2025, LNCS 16321, pp. 337–352, 2026. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-95-5015-9_24

===== PAGE 2 / 16 =====

338 F. Vinci et al.
compositions and orchestrations [4, 19]. In the ﬁrst phase, BPS allows the identiﬁcation 
of potential delays (e.g., slow services or bottlenecks) and the validation of process 
design. In the second phase, analysts can deﬁne what-if scenarios by adjusting resource 
allocations, modifying SLAs, or replacing human tasks with automated services [ 10]. 
The starting point in service-oriented BPS is a process model that describes service 
composition and orchestration logic, extended with an accurate run-time characteri-
zation of different service perspectives, primarily data ﬂow, guards, resource alloca-
tion, and temporal behavior [ 20]. However, traditional approaches often fail to reﬂect 
real-world behavior. Current state-of-the-art works show that integrating deep learn-
ing models into BPS can lead to more realistic run-time characterization [ 7]. However, 
deep learning models are black-box: the rules guiding these predictors are not explic-
itly provided as analytic expressions, thus not being intelligible. As such, it becomes 
impossible to alter these rules to deﬁne what-if scenarios and test the consequences on 
process performance via BPS. Moreover, since deep learning models usually require a 
large amount of data, deep learning-based BPS models cannot be constructed when the 
real process data are limited or missing. In addition, these models are often determinis-
tic, which reduces their ability to generalize across different scenarios and limits their 
applicability in dynamic or uncertain environments. 
This paper addresses these limitations by proposing a simulation approach speciﬁ-
cally designed for service-oriented business processes, where the run-time characteriza-
tion is based on probabilistic decision tree models. These white-box models essentially 
consist of decision rules that service architects and process analysts can inspect and alter 
to test what-if scenarios involving different service conﬁgurations, SLA modiﬁcations, 
or infrastructure changes. We introduce Decision-Aware Business Process Simulation 
models, which are basically process models extended with the run-time characteriza-
tion of BPS based on decision trees (cf. Sect. 
3). Our technique discovers decision trees 
from service execution data, using machine learning to capture service selection rules 
and dependencies across various features (e.g., service attributes, timing, workload) (cf. 
Sect. 
3.3). We also present a method for interacting with these decision trees to deﬁne 
what-if scenarios for service-oriented processes, enabling service architects to evaluate 
the impact of service changes or new service compositions (cf. Sect. 
3.4). 
We evaluated our approach in ﬁve case studies to assess its accuracy in reproducing 
the behavior of the real process (cf. Sect. 4). The results demonstrate that our Decision-
Aware Business Process Simulation (DBPS) approach consistently outperforms the 
state-of-the-art white-box simulation method, namely Simod [ 9] and achieves compet-
itive accuracy compared to black-box approaches [ 5, 17] while offering superior inter-
pretability for service management decisions. Additionally, our method demonstrates 
greater realism and variability in simulation outcomes, making it particularly suitable 
for dynamic service-oriented environments that demand transparent, conﬁgurable, and 
realistic behavioral modeling for effective service orchestration and composition man-
agement. 
2 Related Work 
The work by Rozinat et al. [ 20] is one of the ﬁrst combining process mining techniques 
to discover multiple perspectives of a process (control-ﬂow, attributes, service perfor-

===== PAGE 3 / 16 =====

Reliable and Conﬁgurable Process Simulations via Probabilistic White-Box Models 339
Table 1. Comparison of various simulation approaches across different perspectives (Control-
Flow, Temporal, and Resource). A ◦ symbol indicates that the perspective is modeled using a 
white-box approach, while • denotes a black-box approach. P and D indicate if the models are 
probabilistic or deterministic, respectively. A gray box indicates the use of machine/deep learning 
techniques for the underlying rules. The last column indicates whether the simulation model is 
centered around the control-ﬂow perspective, particularly relevant for service-oriented processes. 
Approach Process Perspective Control-Flow 
CentricControl-Flow Temporal Resource 
Rozinat et al. [ 20] ◦D ◦P ◦P 
Simod [9] ◦P ◦P ◦P 
DSim [5] ◦P • D ◦P 
RIMS [17] ◦P • D ◦P 
Agent Simulator [12] ◦P ◦P ◦P 
Our ◦P ◦P ◦P 
mance, and resource aspects) and integrating them into complete simulation models. In 
this work, the authors propose the use of decision tree models as decision guards in the 
control-ﬂow perspective. 
The increasing availability of data and the advancement of new machine and deep 
learning techniques led to the integration of these into traditional process simulation 
methods. Camargo et al. [ 7] investigated the beneﬁts of employing deep learning tech-
niques compared to the traditional methods, referred to as “data-driven”. The authors 
found that deep learning techniques produce more accurate simulations, although their 
technique does not enable what-if analyses. 
Camargo et al. [ 5] and Meneghello et al. [ 17] propose two hybrid approaches, 
respectively named DSim and RIMS, where a process model is discovered to model 
the process’ control-ﬂow perspective, which is extended with deep learning models for 
the run-time characterization of the time perspectives. However, as mentioned in Sect. 1, 
the use of black-box models makes it impossible to conduct speciﬁc what-if analyses. 
Additionally, deep learning models are usually “data greedy”, making these approaches 
less suitable in case of scarcity of process data for one or more perspectives, or even 
impossible when no process data is available for different perspectives (e.g. event logs 
without resource information). Moreover, these models are inherently deterministic, 
always producing the same output for a given input. This lack of variability introduces 
a limitation in service-oriented business process simulation, where incorporating noise 
and randomness is essential to generate realistic and insightful simulation results. As a 
consequence, their deterministic nature reduces their ability to generalize across differ-
ent scenarios, limiting their applicability in dynamic or uncertain service environments. 
Some body of research exists that focuses on deﬁning white-box models to char-
acterize the run-time BPS aspects. In [ 14], the authors have proposed to train logistic 
regression models to deﬁne data-dependent probabilistic guards, but they do not con-
sider the perspectives on resource and time. The same limitation is also shared with 
RIMS as well as with Simod [
9], another BPS approach that focuses on discovering and 

===== PAGE 4 / 16 =====

340 F. Vinci et al. 
modelling data-dependent branching probabilities using rule-aware models. Recently, 
Kirchdorfer et al. [ 12] have proposed Agent Simulator, an agent-based approach for 
discovering BPS from an event log, providing high interpretability and adaptability. 
This approach reverts the center of simulation attention from the control-ﬂow to the 
resource perspective, using resource models as backbone for BPS models: it follows 
that can be challenging to perform what-if analyses heavily focused on the control-ﬂow 
perspective. In a context of service-oriented business process, approaches that are not 
control-ﬂow centric, such as Agent Simulator, focus primarily on individual services. 
As a result, it becomes more difﬁcult to directly experiment with alternative ways of 
orchestrating a set of services to execute business processes. This orchestration is, in 
fact, the main focus of the control-ﬂow perspective. 
Table 1 provides a comparative summary of state-of-the-art process simulation 
approaches across the key process perspectives (control-ﬂow, temporal, resource), high-
lighting the nature of the modeling techniques employed and whether or not they are 
centered on the control-ﬂow, which is sensible for service-oriented business process 
simulation. The last row refers to the approach proposed in this paper, which - along 
with Simod - is the only approach that employs probabilistic methods to model the run-
time characterization of the process’ perspectives on control-ﬂow, time and resource. 
As mentioned, a probabilistic characterization allows simulations to be more accurate 
and more generalized, while white-box methods are preferable over black-box because 
the former makes it extremely easier to conﬁgure process simulation models for alter-
native what-if analyses. Among the white-box, probabilistic approaches, Simod uses 
simple distributions and probabilities to characterize the temporal and resource perspec-
tive, which naturally do not provide outcomes that are as accurate as those provided by 
machine learning approaches. In fact, our approach focuses on stochastic decision trees, 
highly intuitive and easily conﬁgurable. In summary, Table 
1 allows one to conclude that 
our approach is more accurately capture real-world uncertainties, incorporating noise 
and stochasticity for greater realism, while easily enabling what-if analyses. The exper-
iments presented in Sect. 
4 provide evidence supporting these claims. 
Note that every approach discussed so far, including those reported Table 1 and ours, 
uses methods that capture correlations. These correlations are not used directly for root-
cause analysis and process improvements but are merely used to guide the simulation, 
which is conversely used for root-cause analysis and improvement. There is a large body 
of research on causal reasoning methods, such as by Alaee et al. [
2], which certainly 
provides more rigorous methods for causal inference but, on the other hand, do not 
easily enable what-if analyses. 
3 Decision-Aware Business Process Simulation 
In this paper, we introduce Decision-Aware Business Process Simulation models 
(DBPS), where decision models govern control-ﬂow and temporal simulation param-
eters based on feature values of simulation instances. These decision models operate 
within deﬁned feature spaces, allowing users to interact with and modify service rules 
to perform what-if analyses. 
We ﬁrst introduce some preliminary concepts in Sect. 3.1. In Sect. 3.2, we formally 
deﬁne DBPS, while Sect. 3.3 presents a technique to discover them from an input event 

===== PAGE 5 / 16 =====

Reliable and Conﬁgurable Process Simulations via Probabilistic White-Box Models 341 
log L . Finally, Sect. 3.4 illustrates how users can leverage these simulation models for 
interactive what-if analysis. 
3.1 Preliminaries 
In this section, we introduce key preliminary concepts essential for discussing our pro-
posal. First, basic process mining deﬁnitions are presented, including events, event logs, 
and Petri net models [ 1]. Finally, we explore (probabilistic) decision tree models and 
their application in service-oriented BPS settings. 
Process Data. Event logs are collections of traces [ 1], each recording a process exe-
cution (a.k.a. case) as a temporally ordered sequence of events [ 1]. Each event carries 
a data payload. Let I , A , and R  denote the sets of all possible case identiﬁers, activ-
ities, and resources, respectively. For an event e , w e h a v e case(e) ∈  I, act (e) ∈  A, 
res(e) ∈  R, and time (e) ∈  N, corresponding to the case identiﬁer, executed activity, 
involved resource, and timestamp, respectively. The latter induces the ordering within 
traces. Moreover, lif  e(e) ∈  {start, complete} indicates whether e  marks the start or 
completion of the activity. Finally, let V  and U  denote the sets of attribute names and 
values; then attr (e) : V → U maps each v  ∈  V to its value attr (e)(v) ∈  U, inherited 
from the trace to which e  belongs. 
Event timestamps deﬁne key elements to model in a process simulator. The inter-
arrival times are the times between the arrival of two consecutive cases; the waiting 
time of an event is the time between the start of that event and the time is enabled to 
start; the service execution time of an event is the time needed for executing an activity. 
Fig. 1. Example of a Stochastic Labelled Petri 
net. The black dots (• ) represent the current mark-
ing. Transitions of the enabled transitions are 
annotated with weights depending on the variable 
X. 
Process Models. In this paper, we 
use Petri nets to model and represent 
the activity control-ﬂow of service pro-
cesses with a set of recorded traces 
L [1]. We opted for Petri nets because 
they have a simple yet formal syntax 
and semantics for deﬁning the control-
ﬂow stochasticity. However, the discus-
sion remains valid even using other pro-
cess model notations, such as process 
trees or BPMN models. A Petri net is a 
tuple ( P, T, F, A,  λ), where P  is a ﬁnite 
set of places, T  is a ﬁnite set of tran-
sitions, F  ⊆  ( P × T ) ∪  (T × P ) is a 
set of arcs, and λ  : T  →  A ∪ {τ} is 
a labelling function where τ denotes the 
label of invisible transitions. A Petri net 
marking is a function m  : P  →  N , that assigns to each place the number of tokens it 
contains, representing the current state of the net.

===== PAGE 6 / 16 =====

342 F. Vinci et al. 
A transition t  ∈ T is said to be enabled in a marking m  if each of its input places 
contains at least one token. When an enabled transition ﬁres, it consumes one token 
from each of its input places and produces one token in each of its output places, result-
ing in a new marking that reﬂects the updated state o f the net. 
For modeling the inherent stochasticity of the process simulations, we used the con-
cept of stochastic Petri nets following the procedure described in [ 14], where each 
transition t  ∈  T  is associated with a weight θ t(X) ≥  0 dependent on some values 
X. Speciﬁcally, the probability of ﬁring a transition t  ∈ T at a certain marking m  is 
deﬁned as 
P (t, m) = 
θt(X) 
t ∈ E(m) θt (X) if t  ∈ E(m) 
0otherwise 
where E (m ) ⊆  T is the set of transitions enabled at m . 
Example 1 (Stochastic Labelled Petri Net). Let N  be a Petri net as shown in Fig. 1, 
with the current marking m  highlighted with black dots. The set of enabled transition 
is then E (m) = {b, c, d}. The probability of ﬁring the transition b  is computed as 
P (b, m) = 
1 
X 
1 
X + 1 
2X +1−  1 
X 
= 2 
1+2X . 
Fig. 2. Example of a stochastic decision tree that 
models the execution time of the activity Close 
Application in a credit loan process. C (t) indi-
cates a constant distribution with value t , Exp (t) 
the exponential distribution with mean t , N  (μ, σ) 
the normal distribution with mean μ  and standard 
deviation σ . Numbers at leaf values are in m in-
utes. 
Probabilistic Decision Trees. In this 
paper, we leverage probabilistic deci-
sion tree models for their interpretabil-
ity, explainability, and ease of user inter-
action. Their white-box, interpretable 
nature makes them very suitable to 
enable what if analyses, where deep 
learning models fail (cf. Sect. 2). Other 
white-box models, such as logistic 
regression, rely on counterintuitive coef-
ﬁcient, making them less practical for 
domain analysts who aim to deﬁne 
what-if analyses. Probabilistic decision 
trees make predictions by hierarchically 
splitting the feature space into distinct 
regions based on speciﬁc decision rules. 
In these models, internal nodes and arcs 
deﬁne the decision criteria based on 
features in F , while leaf nodes repre-
sent probability distributions. The use of 
probabilistic distributions make them be different from traditional decision tree, where 
leafs are associated to single static values. 
In the BPS domain, stochasticity plays a crucial role. Traditional deterministic deci-
sion tree models may be inadequate, as they always produce the same output without 
accounting for noises or variability. Through stochastic decision tree, the ﬁnal output is 
then generated by sampling from the distribution associated to the interested leaf. 

===== PAGE 7 / 16 =====

Reliable and Conﬁgurable Process Simulations via Probabilistic White-Box Models 343 
Example 2. In a loan application process, service times of certain activities may depend 
on rules based on previous activities and/or on process attributes. Figure 2 illustrates an 
example of a decision tree modeling the execution time of the closure application activ-
ity. If the loan has not been approved the application closes immediately. Otherwise, for 
requested amounts below 5000, the duration follows a normal distribution with mean 
5 and standard deviation 2. For higher amounts, service time increases and depends on 
the applicant’s credit score. For example, for higher requested amount from customers 
with a low score the closure time follows an Exponential distribution with average 15. 
Given a set of features F, a deterministic decision tree is deﬁned as a function θ ∈ 
(F → R) → R, where, for a given input x ∈ (F → R), that assigns a numerical value 
to each feature, θ(x) represents the decision tree prediction. A probabilistic decision 
tree is a function θ
P ∈ (F → R) → P, where P denotes a set of possible probability 
distributions. For a given input x ∈ (F → R), the output θ P (x) represents a probability 
distribution over possible predictions. Hereafter, Θ F = (F → R) → R and Θ F 
P = 
(F → R) → P indicate the set of all possible deterministic and stochastic decision 
trees built using features F , respectively. 
3.2 Deﬁnition 
Business process simulation models are typically deﬁned by combining a process model 
with a set of simulation parameters. Indeed, process models offer a clear and under-
standable structure for representing the activity control-ﬂow of a process. 
We deﬁne a Decision-Aware Business Process Simulation (DBPS) model as a 
tuple (N, D, P ) where: 
• N = (P, T, F, A, λ) is a Petri net describing t he activity control-ﬂow. 
• D represents descriptive parameters, including resource calendars, the set of possi-
ble resources R, and distributions of trace service attrib utes. 
• P = (p CF , pET , pW T , θ AT ) is the tuple of predictive parameters: 
– pCF : T → Θ FCF assigns to each transition a decision tree that determines the 
transition weights (cf. Sect. 3.1) based on the set of control-ﬂow-related fea-
tures FCF . These features include trace history (i.e., how many times an activ-
ity occurred in past executions of the same trace) and trace attributes, following 
approaches such as those in [ 14], where past executions and trace-level context 
inﬂuence branching decisions. 
– pET : A → Θ FET 
P maps each activity to a probabilistic decision tree that pre-
dicts its service execution time. The set of features F ET includes the resource 
involved in the event, the trace history, and the trace attributes. This is consis-
tent with state-of-the-art works where execution duration is shown to depend on 
who performs the task [ 16]; 
– pW T : R → Θ FW T 
P returns, for each resource r ∈ R, a probabilistic decision 
tree that predicts waiting times of events performed by r. The features in F W T 
incorporate the resource workload (i.e. the current amount of events performed 
by the resource r), trace history and attributes. Waiting time is thus deﬁned 
as resource-dependent, coherently with classical process simulator approaches, 
where waiting times are d riven by resource availabilities and queues; 

===== PAGE 8 / 16 =====

344 F. Vinci et al. 
– θAT ∈ Θ FAT 
P is a probabilistic decision tree that predicts inter-arrival times 
of new process instances. The feature set F AT includes global context features
- speciﬁcally weekday and hour of the day - since arrival times are externally 
driven and must be modeled independently of the internal process execution. 
Once a DBPS model is deﬁned, it can be used to simulate the process. The predictive 
models are then integrated at run-time, following the approach of [ 17]. This enables the 
generation of event logs that contain a speciﬁed number of traces, starting from a given 
initial timestamp. 
3.3 Discovery 
In this section, we present a methodology for discovering Decision-Aware Business 
Process Simulation models from an input event log L. The objective is to identify ser-
vice rule patterns within the event log data for building decision tree models. 
The Petri net model N = (P, T, F, A, λ) can be obtained using process discovery 
algorithms such as Inductive Miner [ 13], while the set of descriptive parameters D can 
be obtained using several techniques proposed in the literature, e.g. [ 15]. 
The event log L is then aligned with the control-ﬂow model N, resulting in an 
event log L N compliant with N. This alignment procedure serves as a basis for the 
construction of the training datasets required by predictive models, namely, the decision 
trees, used in the DBPS. The predictive parameters are then discovered as f ollows. 
Transition Weights. For each transition t ∈ T a training dataset is constructed fol-
lowing a procedure similar to that proposed in [ 14], but using decision trees instead 
of logistic regression models. Speciﬁcally, the training dataset is generated by col-
lecting feature values of F
CF (i.e., trace history and trace attributes), whenever t 
is enabled in the aligned event log L N . The goal is to predict if t will be ﬁred or 
not. A decision tree is then trained as a binary classiﬁer. Finally the leaf values are 
computed as the proportion of correctly classiﬁed samples in each leaf, representing 
the probabilities of ﬁring the transition t when enabled. Each decision tree deﬁnes 
the transition weight function p
CF (t) ∈ Θ F CF for each t ∈ T . 
Execution Times. For each activity a ∈ A, we observe the events e ∈ L such that 
act(e) = a, and build a training set of feature values of F ET , which includes 
resource res(e), trace history and trace attributes attr(e) with their values, aim-
ing to predict the execution time of e. A decision tree is then built for each activity 
a ∈ A. Finally, for each leaf, a best ﬁtting distribution is determined from a set of 
predeﬁned ones by ﬁltering the data based on the corresponding decision rules. The 
distributions are discovered following the procedure in [ 6], which aims to minimize 
the Wasserstein distance. The set of predeﬁned distributions P include: Normal, 
Exponential, LogNormal, Uniform, and Constant. This results in probabilistic deci-
sion trees (cf. Sect. 3.1) deﬁning pET (a) ∈ Θ FET 
P for each activity a ∈ A . 
Waiting Times. For each resource r ∈ R we observed the events e ∈ L N such that 
res(e) = r and build a training set of feature values in F W T (i.e., resource work-
load, trace history and trace attributes) with the goal of predicting the waiting time. 
Speciﬁcally, the waiting time can be computed from the aligned event log by looking 

===== PAGE 9 / 16 =====

Reliable and Conﬁgurable Process Simulations via Probabilistic White-Box Models 345 
at the time between the start timestamp of the event e and the time the correspondent 
transition, in the aligned event log, is enabled. This results in a probabilistic deci-
sion tree p W T (r) ∈ Θ FW T 
P for each resource r ∈ R that models the w aiting time 
distribution for each leaf. 
Inter-Arrival Times. A training dataset is built as follows: for each trace σ ∈ L, t h e 
feature values of F AT (i.e., the current weekday and hour) are retrieved in order to 
predict the arrival time of σ. A decision tree is then trained to estimate the arrival 
time from these feature values. The same procedure as for execution and waiting 
time is then followed to build the probabilistic decision tree θ AT ∈ ΘFAT 
P . 
3.4 User Interaction for What-If Analysis 
In service-oriented business process simulation, explainability is the key. The user aims 
to interact with the simulator to investigate several what-if scenarios, enabling them to 
evaluate the potential impacts of changes without putting them in production. 
Since DBPSs are deﬁned via (probabilistic) decision trees, such analyses are based 
on their modiﬁcations, which are of three types: 
1. Change leaves values, namely distribution parameters in a certain leaf are altered. 
2. Remove subtrees, namely a subtree is replaced by a single leaf. 
3. Add subtrees, namely a composite tree replaces a single leaf. 
Note that these interactions can also be combined, and the user can also deﬁne new deci-
sion tree models (e.g. when including more resources or new activities in the process 
models). When including new resources the user must also model the waiting time for 
them, which may depend on some features in F
W T . Alternatively, users can also reuse 
existing decision trees from other resources to mimic the same behaviors. Also, when 
including a new activity, i.e., new transitions in the process model with a new activ-
ity label, the user can similarly introduce new decision trees for each new transition 
deﬁning the probability of ﬁring that transition when enabled. 
Example 3. Figure 3 illustrates an example of interacting with the decision tree from 
Example example:dt to perform a what-if analysis. In this new scenario, the service 
execution time of Closure is no longer dependent on the Credit Score for requested 
amounts exceeding 5000. Additionally, for requested amounts below 2000, the service 
time is reduced. This adjustment allows evaluating how the process performance is 
affected by these changes. 
4 Experiments 
This section presents the experiments conducted to evaluate the performance of our 
approach compared with the state-of-the-art works. The goal is to show the ability of 
DBPS in producing accurate and realistic simulations from various perspectives. 
Accuracy evaluation focuses on computing distances between the distributions 
observed in the simulated event logs and the real ones [ 8]. We compared our results 

===== PAGE 10 / 16 =====

346 F. Vinci et al. 
Fig. 3. User interaction example on the decision tree illustrated in Fig. 2. C(t) indicates a constant 
distribution with value t, Exp(t) the exponential distribution with mean t, N (μ, σ) the normal 
distribution with mean μ and standard deviation σ. Rules are modiﬁed by removing a decision 
tree and adding a new one in a different branch. The new rule satisﬁes the constraint of the parent 
node (2000 < 5000 ). 
with those obtained by state-of-the-art methods (cf. Sect. 2), showing that our approach 
outperforms the white-box simulation model Simod [ 9], and often achieves competitive 
or superior performance compared to the black-box methods [ 5, 17]. 
Beyond the overall simulation accuracy, our method also demonstrates high preci-
sion in reproducing decision behavior, thanks to explicit modeling of decision rules. 
Furthermore, our simulations exhibit greater generalization and variability, key indica-
tors of realistic behavior, as evidenced by the entropy analysis. 
4.1 Experimental Setup 
The simulator has been implemented as a Python package: the user can manually deﬁne 
each element of the DBPS or can discover one by giving an input event log and/or a 
Petri net model.
1 
We temporally split each event log into train and test sets with respectively 80% and 
20% of the total traces. The train set is used to discover the simulation parameters as 
described in Sect. 3.3, while the test set is employed for the ﬁnal evaluation. 
To ensure a fair evaluation of the different methods, we used the same control-ﬂow 
model as the backbone of the simulation models of the different methods. Speciﬁcally, 
we employed the models used in [
5] and [17]. 
Decision trees have been discovered using the CART algorithm. To maximize accu-
racy, we performed a 3-fold cross-validation with hyperparameter optimization. Specif-
ically, we deﬁned the hyperparameter search space for the maximum tree depth by 
varying its values in the range 1 to 5. In fact, the more terminal nodes and the deeper 
the tree, the more difﬁcult it becomes to understand the decision rules of a tree [
18]. 
1 https://github.com/franvinci/prosit. 

===== PAGE 11 / 16 =====

Reliable and Conﬁgurable Process Simulations via Probabilistic White-Box Models 347 
4.2 Processes and Event Logs 
To assess the accuracy of our approach, we discovered the DBPS models (cf. Sect. 3.3) 
using available event logs from ﬁve different business processes: 
– Purchase to Pay (P2P), which registers executions of a purchasing process. 2 
– CVS retail pharmacy (CVS), which focuses on a retail pharmacy process. 3 
– Academic Credentials Recognition (ACR), which records the executions process at 
the University of Los Andes in Colombia (see footnote 3). 
– BPIC12W, which captures the execution of the subprocess for the workﬂow-relevant 
activities, namely those starting with W, of a loan application process run by a Dutch 
ﬁnancial institution in 2011.
4 
– BPIC17, which refers to the same sub-process as BPC12W, but related to the execu-
tions in 2016, when the process underwent some signiﬁcant changes.
5 
The use cases include two synthetic and three real-life event logs. The BPIC12W and 
BPIC17W event logs also contain trace attributes that are used in the simulations. 
4.3 Accuracy Evaluation 
The goal of the accuracy evaluation is to assess how realistic the simulation conducted 
with our method is and to compare it with Simod [
9], which also uses white-box mod-
els, as well as with RIMS [ 17] and DeepSimulator (DSim) [ 5], which are hybrid BPS 
methods that leverage deep learning techniques. 
Since Agent Simulator [ 12] does not have an explicit control-ﬂow model, this 
method cannot be compared against the others, which conversely have the control-
ﬂow model as backbone. After all, Agent Simulator has a distinct goal, focusing on 
resources as the main process perspective, whereas the others highlight the control-ﬂow 
perspective. 
To assess the accuracy of our proposed method, we conducted simulations and com-
puted distances between the event logs obtained by the different simulation methods and 
the original ones, which were used to build the BPS models. We used three key distance 
metrics introduced by Chapela-Campa et al. [ 8], each targeting a speciﬁc perspective of 
process behavior that aligns with the focus of our approach: N-Gram Distance (NGD), 
with N = 3 for measuring the control-ﬂow quality; Cycle Time Distribution distance 
(CTD) to measure the ability of the model for capturing the times of process instances; 
Case Arrival Rate distance (CAR) to computes the difference in the temporal distri-
bution of case arrivals throughout the p rocess timeline. 
For each case study, we ran ﬁve simulations to obtain event logs containing the 
same number of traces as the real ones, and computed the average distances between 
the obtained event logs. Table 2 presents the results of simulation distances across ﬁve 
case studies, comparing our approach (DBPS) with both white-box (Simod [ 9]) and 
2 https://ﬂuxicon.com/academic/material. 
3 https://zenodo.org/records/4699983. 
4 https://doi.org/10.4121/uuid:3926db30-f712-4394-aebc-75976070e91f. 
5 https://doi.org/10.4121/uuid:5f3067df-f10b-45da-b98b-86ae4c7a310b. 

===== PAGE 12 / 16 =====

348 F. Vinci et al. 
Table 2. Simulation distances results. For each case study, correspondent metric results are 
reported for each method: Simod [ 9], our approach DBPS, DSim [ 5], and RIMS [ 17]. The best 
results are highlighted in bold. Cells highlighted in green indicate best results among the white-
box methods (i.e. Simod and DBPS). Last rows, denoted with Avg., indicate average results for 
each metric and method across the case studies. 
Case Study Metric White-Box Black-Box 
Simod [9] DBPS DSim [5] RIMS [17] 
P2P 
NGD 0.58 0.35 0.60 0.59 
CTD 453.62 432.12 584.30 578.33 
CAR 731.43 669.17 770.54 773.02 
ACR 
NGD 0.53 0.23 0.25 0.23 
CTD 716.05 190.08 70.19 46.28 
CAR 250.33 180.24 236.81 233.66 
CVS 
NGD 0.58 0.12 0.34 0.38 
CTD 269.93 59.90 52.43 99.25 
CAR 5.39 17.78 20.37 20.26 
BPIC12W 
NGD 0.79 0.35 0.66 0.63 
CTD 191.92 32.08 153.37 92.28 
CAR 28.74 79.71 97.49 92.74 
BPIC17W 
NGD 0.81 0.32 0.58 0.58 
CTD 148.79 54.97 114.31 36.53 
CAR 145.96 53.72 24.33 82.29 
Av g. 
NGD 0.66 0.28 0.49 0.48 
CTD 356.06 153.83 194.92 170.53 
CAR 232.37 200.12 229.91 240.39 
black-box (DSim [ 5], RIMS [ 17]) methods. Across nearly all metrics and datasets, 
DBPS consistently outperforms Simod, except for two metrics, establishing it as the 
most effective white-box method. Notably, our method even matches or comes close to 
the performance of state-of-the-art black-box methods RIMS and DSim. 
Although both Simod [ 9] and RIMS [ 17] incorporate decision models within the 
control-ﬂow, our approach demonstrates superior effectiveness. This can be attributed 
to two key factors: (1) unlike Simod and RIMS, which rely solely on event attributes, 
our method also leverages process history as a predictive feature; and (2) we model 
transition behavior using weighted probabilities on transitions, allowing us to capture 
priority in concurrent executions (see Example 
1), while Simod and RIMS apply deci-
sion trees only at XOR gateways. 
To further evaluate the accuracy of our method in modeling decision rules, we ana-
lyzed the behavior of simulated and real event data at the level of decision tree leaves. 
For time-related decision trees (i.e., arrival time, execution time, and waiting time; see 
Sect. 
3), we used the Wasserstein distance to compare distributions (respectively indi-

===== PAGE 13 / 16 =====

Reliable and Conﬁgurable Process Simulations via Probabilistic White-Box Models 349 
Table 3. Rule-based distance results. Each row reports a case study. Results are grouped by metric 
(Rule-CFD, Rule-A TD, Rule-ETD, Rule-WTD), with Simod [9] and our approach (DBPS). The 
best results are highlighted in bold. Averages are reported in the last row. 
Case Study Rule-CFD Rule-A TD Rule-ETD Rule-WTD 
Simod [9] DBPS Simod [9] DBPS Simod [9] DBPS Simod [9] DBPS 
P2P 0.16 0.05 768.31 786.06 128.82 24.76 1525.20 1706.52 
ACR 0.28 0.13 136.77 81.43 6.22 10.54 364.92 742.67 
CVS 0.24 0.01 0.37 0.60 3.23 0.70 1222.63 515.57 
BPIC12W 0.26 0.08 5.26 2.26 10.35 3.57 471.85 224.02 
BPIC17W 0.23 0.08 2.35 1.91 11.71 8.95 827.22 873.44 
Av g. 0.23 0.07 182.61 174.45 32.07 9.70 882.37 812.44 
cated with Rule-A TD, Rule-ETD, Rule-WTD). For decision trees modeling transition 
weights, we computed the absolute difference in transition ﬁring frequencies (Rule-
CFD). We compared our approach with Simod [9], as DSim [5] and RIMS [17] either do 
not produce resource information - used as features in some decision trees - or lack the 
necessary trace attribute (cf. Sect. 3.2). Table 3 summarizes the results across the four 
rule-based metrics. Our approach (DBPS) outperforms Simod [ 9] in the vast majority 
of cases, achieving the lowest average distances in all four metrics. In particular, DBPS 
shows substantial improvements in Rule-CFD and Rule-ETD, indicating more accurate 
modeling of control-ﬂow decisions and execution time distributions. These results con-
ﬁrm the enhanced precision of our simulations in replicating the decision logic within 
the process. 
Table 4. Average entropy of execution time distributions. For each case study, correspondent 
results are reported for each method: Simod [ 9], our approach DBPS, DSim [ 5], RIMS [ 17], and 
our deterministic approach DBPS-det. Best results are highlighted in bold. Red background is 
used to indicate the worst results. Last row, denoted with Avg., indicate average results for each 
metric and method across the case studies. 
Case Study Probabilistic (Partly) Deterministic 
Simod [9] DBPS DSim [5] RIMS [17] DBPS-det 
P2P 1.33 1.38 1.16 1.20 0.56 
ACR 1.01 1.15 0.74 0.59 0.85 
CVS 0.64 0.36 0.57 0.57 0.08 
BPIC12W 1.65 2.25 0.56 0.56 0.60 
BPIC17W 1.97 2.21 0.61 0.61 0.76 
Av g. 1.32 1.47 0.73 0.71 0.57 
We attribute the superior and competitive performance of our method compared to 
black-box ones to its inherently probabilistic nature. While RIMS [ 17] and DSim [ 5] 

===== PAGE 14 / 16 =====

350 F. Vinci et al. 
rely on deterministic deep learning models to generate execution times—often result-
ing in rigid, overﬁtted behavior with limited temporal variability—our method leverages 
probabilistic decision trees to effectively capture uncertainty and reﬂect the natural vari-
ability observed in real-world processes. To further support this claim, we computed 
the entropy of execution time distributions across all activities on the simulated event 
logs. Entropy has been widely used in the literature as an indicator of variability and 
generalization capacity of process data [
3]. Higher entropy reﬂects a greater ability to 
reproduce the variability found in real processes, which is desirable for realistic sim-
ulation. Speciﬁcally, since execution times are continuous variables, we approximated 
their entropy by discretizing the observed simulated values into bins b
1, . . . , bk. T h e 
optimal number of bins is based on the Sturges’ rule, which computes the number of 
bins as k = 
log2 (n) + 1 , where n is the number of observed samples. Then the 
entropy of a probability distribution p a of execution time of activity a is computed as 
H(pa) = − k 
i=1 pa 
i log(pa 
i 
), where p a 
i 
expresses the probability of a value being in 
the bin b i. The average execution time entropy is then obtained as 1 
|A| a∈A H(pa), 
with A the set of possible acti vities. 
Table 4 reports the average execution time entropy values, with methods grouped 
into Probabilistic and Deterministic categories. We also include DBPS-det, a determin-
istic variant of our method that replaces probabilistic decision trees with determinis-
tic ones. As expected, all deterministic approaches exhibit substantially lower entropy, 
conﬁrming their limited ability to capture temporal variability. This statement is partic-
ularly conﬁrmed if we compare the entropy values of our approach DBPS with DBPS-
det: the simple replacement in the latter of probabilistic decision trees with determin-
istic ones causes a signiﬁcant drop in the entropy values, further pointing out that the 
improvement is certainly related to being probabilistic. Our approach (DBPS) achieves 
higher entropy on average and across all case studies, except for CVS. The CVS dataset 
warrants special attention. As noted by its authors, it is synthetically generated, likely 
without emphasizing behavioral variability. Consequently, it exhibits limited behavior 
variability, which explains the relatively lower entropy observed in this case. 
These ﬁndings underscore the effectiveness of our method in generating behav-
iorally accurate, realistic, and diverse simulations while maintaining full interpretabil-
ity. We consistently outperform the white-box Simod [9], not only in overall simulation 
accuracy but also in faithfully modeling decision rules. Moreover, our method achieves 
competitive accuracy when compared to black-box state-of-the-art approaches, while 
offering greater realism by capturing a higher degree of behavioral variability, as 
demonstrated by the entropy analysis. 
5 Conclusion 
The simulation of business processes that involve human resources and/or services is 
based on a model that describes how activities are executed, along with a character-
ization of how the perspectives on data, resource, and time are simulated. This char-
acterization refers to new process-instance arrival times, activity durations, resource 
assignment, data-dependent probabilistic guards, etc. 

===== PAGE 15 / 16 =====

Reliable and Conﬁgurable Process Simulations via Probabilistic White-Box Models 351 
While several approaches exist for discovering business process simulation models 
and characterizing their run-time behavior, most rely on deep learning and/or determin-
istic models. Deep learning models are typically black-boxes and do not expose their 
decision logic in an interpretable, analytical form. This limits their conﬁgurability and 
hinders the ability to perform meaningful what-if analyses. Deterministic models, in 
turn, fail to capture the inherent stochasticity and uncertainty of real-world processes. 
This paper proposes a novel approach that uses probabilistic decision trees for run-
time characterization. These decision models are both white-box, allowing for easy 
interpretation and conﬁgurability, and stochastic, enabling the simulation of natural pro-
cess variability. 
Our technique has been compared with those existing related techniques that are 
based on black-box and/or deterministic models as well as with the only technique 
from the state of the art that is based on stochastic, white-box models. Five different 
processes were used in the evaluation, and the results outline that our method enables 
running business process simulations that are more realistic than and generalize more 
than these existing techniques. 
We acknowledge that the current evaluation is largely quantitative on the ability 
of decision trees to adequately characterize the run-time characterization of business 
simulation. As future work, we aim to assess the human usability and interpretability 
of stochastic decision trees to conduct what-if analyses. So we plan to investigate the 
trade-off between usability and interpretability, on the one hand, and decision tree depth, 
on the other hand: we hypothesize that deeper trees, while potentially more accurate, 
may hinder users’ ability to understand and effectively utilize them for what-if analyses. 
We plan to conduct user studies with process experts using consolidated techniques for 
human-computer interaction and cognitive psychology. 
Acknowledgments. F. Vinci is ﬁnancially supported by MUR (PNRR) and University of Padua. 
M. de Leoni is supported by the European Union – Next Generation EU under the National 
Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), Mission 4 Component 2 Investment 1.1 - Call PRIN 2022 
PNRR No. 1409 of September 14, 2022 of Italian Ministry of University and Research; Project 
P20222XM58 (subject area: SH) Emergency medicine 4.0: an integrated data-driven approach 
to improve emergency department performances. 
References 
1. Aalst, W.: Process Modeling and Analysis. In: Aalst, W. (ed.) Process Mining, pp. 55–88. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4_3 
2. Alaee, A.J., Weidlich, M., Senderovich, A.: Data-driven decision support for business pro-
cesses: causal reasoning and discovery. In: Marrella, A., Resinas, M., Jans, M., Rosemann, 
M. (eds.) BPM 2024. LNBIP , vol. 526, pp. 90–106. Springer, Cham (2024). https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-031-70418-5_6 
3. Back, C.O., Debois, S., Slaats, T.: Entropy as a measure of log variability. J. Data Semant. 8, 
129–156 (2019) 
4. Bartsch, C., Mevius, M., Oberweis, A.: Simulation of it service processes with petri-nets. In: 
Service-Oriented Computing – ICSOC 2008 Workshops, pp. 53–65 (2009) 

===== PAGE 16 / 16 =====

352 F. Vinci et al. 
5. Camargo, M., Báron, D., Dumas, M., González-Rojas, O.: Learning business process simu-
lation models: a hybrid process mining and deep learning approach. Inf. Syst. 117, 102248 
(2023) 
6. Camargo, M., Dumas, M., González-Rojas, O.: Automated discovery of business process 
simulation models from event logs. Decis. Support Syst. 134, 113284 (2020) 
7. Camargo, M., Dumas, M., Rojas, O.G.: Discovering generative models from event logs: 
data-driven simulation vs deep learning. PeerJ Comput. Sci. 7 (2021) 
8. Chapela-Campa, D., Benchekroun, I., Baron, O., Dumas, M., Krass, D., Senderovich, A.: A 
framework for measuring the quality of business process simulation models. Inf. Syst. 127, 
102447 (2025) 
9. Chapela-Campa, D., López-Pintado, O., Suvorau, I., Dumas, M.: Simod: automated discov-
ery of business process simulation models. SoftwareX 30, 102157 (2025) 
10. Dumas, M., La Rosa, M., Mendling, J., Reijers, H.A.: Fundamentals of Business Process 
Management, 2nd edn. Springer, Cham (2018) 
11. Henkel, M., Zdravkovic, J., Johannesson, P .: Service-based processes: design for business 
and technology. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Service Oriented 
Computing, ICSOC 2004, pp. 21–29 (2004) 
12. Kirchdorfer, L., Blümel, R., Kampik, T., V an der Aa, H., Stuckenschmidt, H.: AgentSim-
ulator: an agent-based approach for data-driven business process simulation. In: 2024 6th 
International Conference on Process Mining (ICPM), pp. 97–104 (2024) 
13. Leemans, S.J.J., Fahland, D., van der Aalst, W.M.P .: Discovering block-structured process 
models from event logs - a constructive approach. In: Colom, J.-M., Desel, J. (eds.) PETRI 
NETS 2013. LNCS, vol. 7927, pp. 311–329. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). https://doi.org/10. 
1007/978-3-642-38697-8_17 
14. de Leoni, M., Vinci, F., Leemans, S.J.J., Mannhardt, F.: Investigating the inﬂuence of data-
aware process states on activity probabilities in simulation models: does accuracy improve? 
In: Di Francescomarino, C., Burattin, A., Janiesch, C., Sadiq, S. (eds.) BPM 2023. LNCS, 
vol. 14159, pp. 129–145. Springer, Cham (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-41620-
0_8 
15. López-Pintado, O., Dumas, M.: Discovery and simulation of business processes with prob-
abilistic resource availability calendars. In: 2023 5th International Conference on Process 
Mining (ICPM), pp. 1–8 (2023) 
16. López-Pintado, O., Dumas, M., Berx, J.: Discovery, simulation, and optimization of business 
processes with differentiated resources. Inf. Syst. 120, 102289 (2024) 
17. Meneghello, F., Di Francescomarino, C., Ghidini, C., Ronzani, M.: Runtime integration of 
machine learning and simulation for business processes: time and decision mining predic-
tions. Inf. Syst. 128, 102472 (2025) 
18. Molnar, C.: Interpretable Machine Learning, 3rd edn. (2025) 
19. Pourbafrani, M., van der Aalst, W.M.P .: Interactive process improvement using simulation 
of enriched process trees. In: Hacid, H., et al. (eds.) ICSOC 2021. LNCS, vol. 13236, pp. 
61–76. Springer, Cham (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-14135-5_5 
20. Rozinat, A., Mans, R., Song, M., van der Aalst, W.: Discovering simulation models. Inf. 
Syst. 34(3), 305–327 (2009) 
21. Wang, J., Lu, C., Y u, Y ., Cao, B., Fang, K., Fan, J.: HiGPP: a history-informed graph-based 
process predictor for next activity. In: Service-Oriented Computing, pp. 337–353 (2025) 