

===== PAGE 1 / 19 =====

 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence In Medicine
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/artmed  
Research Paper
Improving organizational processes in healthcare through simulation-driven 
resource allocation: Methodology and real-world case study
Francesco Vinci a
 ,∗, Davide Aloini b, Elisabetta Benevento b, Alessandro Stefanini b
 , 
Francesca Zen a
 , Massimiliano de Leoni a
a Department of Mathematics, University of Padua, Padua, 35121, Italy
b Department of Energy, Systems, Land and Construction Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa, 56126, Italy
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Process mining
Process simulation
Process improvement
Emergency department
 A B S T R A C T
The global rise in the aging population presents significant challenges to healthcare systems worldwide, which 
thus need more efficiency and effectiveness. Healthcare systems deliver services through processes that encode 
(inter)national regulations and protocols for patient treatment. It follows that efficiency and effectiveness 
require improvement of healthcare processes. This paper introduces a novel methodology leveraging process 
mining and simulation to improve healthcare organizational processes through data-driven resource allocation. 
Traditional qualitative analyses and queuing theory offer limited scope for complex, multi-activity processes.
In contrast, process simulation enables process improvement but requires a realistic simulation model; 
otherwise, the analysis may optimize an assumed process rather than the real one. This paper reports on a 
data-driven simulation methodology that builds on process mining techniques: process mining puts aside the 
subjectivity of process actors and focuses on the objectivity of transactional data recorded by information 
systems. This enables us to discover process simulation models that mimic real behavior. Simulation models 
support process improvement through the evaluation of alternative what-if scenarios, which can be tested 
without disrupting live operations. The methodology has been applied to the emergency department of an 
Italian hospital, focusing on reducing patient waiting times. Simulations involving a careful addition of medical 
staff demonstrated a potential substantial reduction in waiting times (88%) with a modest cost increase 
(7%–8%). Furthermore, the improved process exhibited enhanced resilience to surges in patient arrivals, 
highlighting how improved processes guarantee higher preparedness in front of emergencies.
1. Introduction
Recent reports, e.g. from World Health Organization (WHO) [1] and 
from the World Bank [2], are clearly indicating that every nation is 
witnessing a rise in both the number and proportion of older adults 
within their populations. By 2030, one in six people globally will be 
aged 60 or older. The population in this age group is projected to 
grow from 1 billion in 2020 to 1.4 billion. Looking ahead to 2050, the 
number of people aged 60 and over is expected to double, reaching 
2.1 billion. Additionally, the population of those aged 80 and above 
is anticipated to triple, increasing to 426 million by mid-century. This 
trend has originally been seen in western world but has recently been 
observed world-wide.
‘‘All countries face major challenges to ensure that their health and social 
systems are ready to make the most of this demographic shift’’ [1]: the 
healthcare costs are destined to steadily grow, and a smaller share of 
population can be employed to provide healthcare support.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: francesco.vinci@unipd.it (F. Vinci).
Healthcare administrations deliver services through processes that 
codify rules and regulations, and actions need to be taken on these pro-
cesses to improve their efficiency and reduce the costs to tackle with the 
aging-population challenge. The improvement of healthcare processes 
would also reduce the errors, and thus enhance the patient outcomes, 
with better diagnosis, treatment, and overall care, reducing complica-
tions and mortality rates. This improvement would also positively affect 
the workforce well-being, with reduction of stress and burnout among 
healthcare professionals. Last but very importantly, improving health-
care processes would increase preparedness and resilience for emergen-
cies, whose importance has been pointed out by the COVID-19 pan-
demic: the management of crises (pandemics, natural disasters, mass 
casualties, etc.) can be better dealt with through improved processes.
These processes, particularly in clinical settings, are often complex 
and can vary accordingly to several factors, situations, and patient 
characteristics. Therefore, their improvement is not straightforward.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2026.103391
Received 28 May 2025; Received in revised form 26 February 2026; Accepted 2 March 2026
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
Available online 6 March 2026 
0933-3657/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

===== PAGE 2 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
This paper’s goal is to provide a methodology in which processes 
are improved, and the extent of this improvement is aimed to be quan-
tified. Therefore, we exclude the use of qualitative-analysis techniques, 
such as Value-Added & Waste Analysis, Root-Cause Analysis, or Pareto 
Analysis [3]. Instead, we aim at quantitative analyses, which can be 
based on the applications of queuing theory or business process simu-
lation [4]. Queuing-based analyses are excellent for capacity problems, 
which are common and a key driver of process redesign. However, 
a number of limitations exist, as pointed out by Dumas et al. [3]. 
They can be used to analyze waiting times (and hence processing 
times) but cannot focus on cost or quality measures. It is certainly 
suitable to analyze a single activity at a time that can be performed by 
resources in one single pool, but fails when aiming at analyzing end-
to-end processes consisting of multiple activities performed by multiple 
resource pools. Process simulation provides a means of overcoming 
these limitations [3–5].
Process simulation refers to techniques that mimic the dynamic 
behavior of a process using different aspects. These techniques can 
be used to conduct what-if scenarios, avoiding the need for building 
or disrupting the real-world system. Through the analysis of different
what-if scenarios, it is possible to assess the impact of the changes 
onto the processes, protocols, and norms leading to the initial/current 
process.
Process simulation requires a model that encodes the process being 
analyzed and needs to be coupled with parameters that specify the run-
time simulation aspects (arrival rate, activity-duration distributions, 
etc.). Traditionally, these deliverables have been provided through 
interviews and questions with process actors and stakeholders, based on 
their subjectivity, ignoring objective insights that actual process trans-
actional data can provide. Subjectivity in developing and employing 
simulation models can lead to theoretical process improvements which 
do not correspond to reality.
Process Mining is a discipline that bridges Artificial Intelligence 
and Data Mining techniques with process modeling, aiming primarily 
at uncovering how processes are actually executed [6]. Instead of 
relying on interviews, workshops, or theoretical models, which can be 
subjective or outdated, process mining analyzes the digital footprints 
left behind in IT systems to understand how processes actually run 
and to derive accordant models and run-time characterization of their 
executions. These digital footprints are represented as event logs, each 
recording the executions of instances of a certain process.
This paper brings forward a methodology that leverages process 
mining to discover the model of the process to simulate, along with the 
run-time characterization of the different process perspectives on activi-
ties, resources, and time. The methodology takes into account of several 
healthcare process characteristics, facing relevant, open challenges (cf. 
discussion in Section 3).
The methodology was concretely applied to the emergency depart-
ment of an Italian hospital, with the aim of improving patient waiting 
times both before and during treatment. The methodology includes a 
validation phase to assess a sufficient level of realism of the simulation 
model, which was positively confirmed for the case study in question. 
The improvement attempt was carried out by simulating various what-
if scenarios based on the addition of resources in different roles—such 
as specialists, nurses, and laboratory technicians. Since hiring resources 
for certain roles is more expensive than for others, the potential benefits 
must be weighed against the associated costs. These benefits are primar-
ily reflected in the reduction of waiting times for activities requiring 
specific roles. Ultimately, this means that a trade-off exists that must 
be carefully balanced.
The results of the application of the methodology on the case 
study show that the waiting time can be potentially improved by 
approximately 88% compared to the original time, with a limited 
cost’s increase of around 7%–8%. A simulation-driven analysis of the 
waiting times in case of various increases of arrival rate confirms that 
healthcare process improvement is also beneficial for the preparedness 
in case of emergencies: the patient’s waiting time increases less than 
half when the patient arrival rate doubles, if compared with the original 
process.
The methodology presented in this paper is particularly well suited 
for organizational healthcare processes, i.e., processes that are struc-
tured, standardized, and primarily concerned with resource manage-
ment and routing of patients through organizational units (as op-
posed to highly flexible, knowledge-intensive clinical workflows) [7]. 
For such processes our data-driven simulation discovery approach ef-
fectively captures control-flow, temporal, and resource perspectives 
from event logs, supporting realistic what-if analyses and resource 
optimization.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 introduces key 
concepts in the fields of Process Mining and Process Simulation. Sec-
tion 3 then discusses open process mining challenges in the healthcare 
domain, positioning our research with respect to the current state of 
the art. Section 4 presents our methodology in a step-by-step manner. 
Section 5 describes the successful application of the methodology to the 
emergency department of an Italian hospital. Section 6 discusses poten-
tial threats to validity, both in relation to the proposed methodology 
and to the conducted case study, and identifies possible directions for 
future research. Section 7 reviews relevant literature on the application 
of Process Mining and Process Simulation in the healthcare domain. 
Finally, Section 8 summarizes the main findings and concludes the 
paper.
2. Background
2.1. Process mining
Process Mining is an emerging scientific discipline that aims to 
improve operational processes through the systematic use of process’ 
event data [6]. The novelty of Process Mining compared with the 
traditional process intelligence lays in leveraging on the objectivity 
of the event data in place of human subjectivity (e.g. retrieved via 
questionnaires, interviews, etc.). This explains why Process Mining is 
considered as the missing link between Process and Data science: the 
aim remains to improve the operational processes, but focusing on 
the real processes, as described in the data, instead of the supposed
processes, which would come from the subjective views of the process’ 
actors.
2.1.1. Event logs
Process’ event data are represented as event logs. Table  1 shows 
a tabular representation of an event log: each row represents an event, 
which captures a specific execution of an activity within a case (i.e., an 
instance of the process). Column headers represent attributes associated 
with events, i.e. a table field specifies the given column’s attribute 
value of the row’s event. Mandatory attributes are Case Identifier, which 
allows identifying to which case the event refers, the Timestamp when 
the event occurred, and the Activity that was executed. Other typical 
attributes are the Resource that executed the activity and Transactional 
information indicating the activity’s state. Using transactional informa-
tion, one can determine the duration of the activities. As an example, 
the execution of activity Lab Service for case 002083 started at 1:30 on 
15 March, and completed at 2:20, and hence, took 50 min.
2.1.2. Process models
Aside from event logs, another typical artifact of process mining 
techniques is a process model. A process model is a description of how 
a process ought to be executed. Compared with a textual description in 
natural language, a process model encodes (or should encode) the set 
of allowed executions in a more formal way. Using a formal process 
modeling notation has several advantages, i.e., it allows us to assess 
various quality properties of the model, e.g., absence of deadlocks. It 
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
2 

===== PAGE 3 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Table 1
Event log example based on the emergency department case study in Section 5. Each row represents an event with its attributes. 
The sequence of events sharing the same Case Id is a trace, i.e. the sequence of events of a single patient during the process.
 Case Id Activity Timestamp Lifecycle Age Access type Urgency code Pathology 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 002082 Access Mar 15, 00:17 Complete 49 Autonomous Blue Skin rash 
 002082 Triage Mar 15, 00:17 Complete 49 Autonomous Blue Skin rash 
 002082 Visit Mar 15, 01:26 Complete 49 Autonomous Blue Skin rash 
 002082 Discharge Mar 15, 01:27 Complete 49 Autonomous Blue Skin rash 
 002082 Exit Mar 15, 01:28 Complete 49 Autonomous Blue Skin rash 
 002083 Access Mar 15, 00:48 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 Triage Mar 15, 00:48 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 Visit Mar 15, 01:26 complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 Blood sampling Mar 15, 01:30 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 Lab service Mar 15, 01:30 Start 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 CT request Mar 15, 01:30 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 CT accept Mar 15, 01:32 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 CT execution Mar 15, 01:55 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 CT reporting Mar 15, 02:06 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 Lab service Mar 15, 02:20 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 Medium short stay unit Mar 15, 02:22 Start 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 Medium short stay unit Mar 15, 11:10 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 Discharge Mar 15, 11:10 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 002083 Exit Mar 15, 11:48 Complete 72 Ambulance (no doctor) Yellow Mild TBI  
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Fig. 1. Example process model in BPMN notation, which represents the same activities as presented in the event log in Table  1.  (For interpretation of the 
references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
also allows software tools to automatically reason about the modeled 
process behavior.
Several modeling notations have been put forward [6]. However, 
the current de-facto standard in industry is the Business Process Model 
and Notation (BPMN) formalism, which forms a trade-off between 
being mathematically grounded and human interpretable notation [3].
Fig.  1 illustrates a simple model, describing the same process be-
havior as captured in Table  1. This is not the real process model used 
in the case study discussed in Section 5, but is only a toy example to 
showcase the main constructs of BPMN.
The model describes a few fundamental constructs, often used when 
modeling a process. The green circle represents the starting point of 
the process, whereas the orange circle represents the end point. Each 
rounded rectangle represents an activity that we are able to execute 
within the process, e.g., the visit activity. The arcs represent the general 
behavioral flow of the model, e.g., the first activity is access.
The diamond-shaped operators represent behavioral control-flow 
constructs. The diamonds containing a ×-symbol represent an exclusive 
choice, i.e., either one of the outgoing/incoming arcs is followed. The 
diamonds containing a + -symbol represent concurrency: all outgo-
ing/incoming arcs (and branches) are followed and executed com-
pletely independently/concurrently. The + -symbols with multiple in-
coming arcs are synchronization points. We refer the reader to [3] for 
a more elaborate introduction.
2.1.3. Process discovery
While Process Mining can be used to assess the compliance of 
process executions w.r.t. a set of norms and protocols or to provide 
run-time operational support, the lion’s share of attention is certainly 
about process discovery [6].
Process discovery aims at derive a process model from an event log, 
e.g. in the form of a BPMN model. Several process-discovery algorithms 
exist in literature [6], where each algorithm has its representational 
bias: some can only discover models with specific constructs and may 
not capture all observed behavior. Algorithms also differ in their ability 
to separate legitimate behavior from rare or noisy events, incorporating 
primarily the former. This distinction is especially relevant in health-
care, where most behavior follows established medical protocols and 
only a small portion consists of exceptions. Focusing on the mainstream 
behavior is important when the goal is to improve healthcare process 
performance, such as reducing costs, minimizing waiting times, and 
increasing satisfaction for both professionals and patients.
Process Mining also provides metrics to assess the quality of a 
model. The main metrics used in the literature are fitness, precision, and
generalization [6], whose computation requires a reference event log 
to be computed. Fitness measures the average level of compliance of 
the traces of the reference event log with the process model. Precision 
measures to which extend the process model do not allow process 
executions that are not observed in the reference event log. However, 
while we desire the model to be precise, we also aim at a model that 
is capable to fairly generalize beyond the observed behavior: an event 
log typically records only a portion of the full range of behavior that a 
process can exhibit, while a model aims to represent the entire behavior 
set. The latter is not measured by precision: metrics generalization
aims to quantify how much the model is able to generalize beyond 
the behavior set that has been observed. For further information and 
formalizations of these metrics, the reader is referred to [6].
The discovery algorithms mentioned above focus on discovering a 
process model that defines the sequences of activities that are allowed 
by the process. However, a process incorporates other perspectives, 
mainly on resources, decisions, and time. These perspectives can also 
be discovered by analyzing event logs. An extensive discussion on the 
discovery of these other perspectives is provided in [8]. The remainder 
provides a short overview of those employed to construct business 
simulation models.
Burattin et al. [9] focus on the resource perspective: their technique is 
capable to determine the roles within the organization and to associate 
resources to these roles. Similarly, Camargo et al. [10] addresses the 
discovery of the resource perspective by clustering resources with 
similar activity execution profiles to identify resource pools and assign 
activities accordingly.
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
3 

===== PAGE 4 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
The decision perspective focuses on determining the conditions on 
the process-instance attributes (e.g., the patient’s triage code, age, 
or suspected pathology) that drive the choices of the process paths 
(e.g., whether or not to perform a blood test, a certain type of visit, 
or imaging analysis). Correctly modeling these decisions is crucial 
for an understanding of the process, and even more for its accurate 
simulation [8,11].
The time perspective focuses on discovering the distribution of the 
activity durations, but also on evaluating potential bottlenecks [8]. 
Activity durations are rather easy to compute by computing the dif-
ference between the event indicating the completion of activities and 
the event indicating the starting. See, e.g., the two events related to the
lab service activity in Table  1. From the individual activity durations, 
the best distributions can be easily determined using standard statistical 
techniques. Similarly, bottlenecks can be computed by considering the 
timestamp difference between the completion of an activity and the 
starting of the next.
Recently, object-centric process mining has been proposed to rep-
resent events associated with multiple object types and their rela-
tionships [12], providing a more natural view of complex interacting 
entities such as patients, lab tests, and imaging orders. It also shows 
promise for process simulation, as it supports the modeling of multi-
entity scenarios [13,14]. However, current object-centric process simu-
lation techniques are still in their early stages and face methodological 
and tooling limitations; therefore, this work focuses on classical process 
mining approaches based on the single-case notion.
2.2. Process simulation
Process simulation is one of the most widely used and supported 
techniques for quantitatively analyzing process models [3]. The core 
concept behind process simulation involves the use of a simulator to 
generate numerous hypothetical instances of a process. The simulator’s 
output typically includes simulation logs, similar to event logs, along 
with key statistics, such as the averages of process-execution times, 
waiting times, resource utilization, or average costs.
Process simulation requires analysts to provide a simulation model 
 = (  , ) , consisting of a control-flow process model  , such as 
in the BPMN modeling language, and a set of simulation parameters 
. Parameters  define the run-time characterization of the process 
simulation:
1. the probability distribution of activity durations,
2. the probabilities to follow each of the alternative branches at the 
exclusive choice,
3. the probabilities distribution of the arrival rate of new process 
instances,
4. the working hours,
5. the costs,
6. the roles of the resources involved in the process,
7. the assignment of resources to different roles where a resource 
can play different roles,
8. the assignment of the activity authorizations to roles (namely, 
the roles that a resource needs to play to be allowed/able to 
perform a certain activity).
Process simulation is certainly useful to simulate the current pro-
cess, but is even more valuable for what-if analysis, which refers to 
simulate alternative scenarios, also referred to as what-if scenarios. 
These alternative scenarios are obtained by altering the process model 
and/or varying the simulation parameters. A what-if analysis consists 
of formulating alternative scenarios, simulating them, and measuring 
the impact on a certain Key Performance Indicator (KPI) of inter-
est (e.g., the patient’s waiting times). By inspecting these alternative 
scenarios, process analysts formulate realistic hypothesis of process 
improvement. The advantage of this analysis type over conducting on-
the-field experiments resides in a significant reduction of the risks. 
A what-if scenario that yields very poor KPI values may, e.g., put in 
danger the hospital’s patients, leading to deaths, or irreparable physical 
or psychic damages.
The problem can be formally formulated as a stochastic optimiza-
tion problem aiming at finding the best simulation model ( , ) that 
minimizes the expected value of the objective function 𝑓 ( , ) that 
encodes the KPI of interest. This might suggest that the formulation 
of an opportune Mixed-Integer Linear Program (MILP) could be an 
alternative. However, this is not really feasible: MILPs do not account 
for stochasticity, neither is it practical feasible to encode the constraints 
imposed by a process model  as a set of MILP constraints, especially 
when the model allows for executions that are arbitrarily long.
Compared with other techniques for quantitative analysis, first and 
foremost queuing analysis, process simulation is capable to analyze the 
single activities of an end-to-end processes and improve on them sin-
gularly, also considering the different roles and resources. Conversely, 
queuing analysis is only suitable to analyze the process as a whole, 
assuming it to be all performed by single resources [3]. Furthermore, 
queuing analysis can be used to analyze and improve on waiting times, 
but cannot be used to improve on cost or quality measures [3].
The simulation results are only as trustworthy as the underlying 
simulation model. An inaccurate model would produce unrealistic out-
comes, leading to conclusions that may appear valid in theory but 
not in practice. This article aims to reduce subjective assumptions 
by deriving the simulation model and parameters directly from event 
data recorded in process logs. This ensures that the analysis and op-
timization are grounded in the observed behavior of the real process. 
While the evaluation is performed in a simulated setting, the approach 
provides an objective evidence-based foundation for assessing potential 
improvements prior to real-world implementation.
Section 2.1.3 indicates that many techniques exist in literature that 
focus on the discovery of the process’ perspective related to control-
flow, resource, and time. These discovery techniques are leveraged on 
in this paper to build simulation models and to use them for process 
improvement.
3. Our contribution to the open challenges
Process mining applications in the healthcare domain face several 
challenges to be dealt with [15]. Building on these insights, our work 
contributes to tackling several of the open challenges identified by 
Munoz-Gama et al. [15], through a methodology tailored to the spe-
cific needs and constraints of healthcare environments. Our proposed 
methodology aligns with several of these challenges:
C1: Design Dedicated/Tailored Methodologies and Frameworks
We developed a methodology for healthcare scenarios, which 
integrates simulation and process mining to automate improve-
ments. Its design reflects key features of organizational healthcare 
processes, such as urgency-driven workflows, variable patient 
arrivals, and time-critical resource allocation, identified in col-
laboration with healthcare stakeholders. Note that the underlying 
principles of the methodology, namely simulation-driven resource 
allocation and process improvement, might be valid in other 
domains with similar organizational and resource constraints, al-
though we do not have a supporting case study that can concretely 
showcase the methodology’s application to other domains.
C2: Discover Beyond Discovery We used simulation to go beyond 
traditional discovery by incorporating enhancement and confor-
mance checking.
C4: Deal with Reality We assessed the realism of generated models 
using state-of-the-art accuracy metrics [26], ensuring fidelity to 
observed behavior and compliance with medical protocols.
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
4 

===== PAGE 5 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Table 2
Overview of process simulation approaches in the Healthcare domain, and their attributes aligned with 
key challenges identified in [15]. ‘‘+’’ indicates that the corresponding work fully addresses the challenge, 
‘‘+∕−’’ indicates partial consideration. Empty cells indicate that the challenge is not addressed. Last row 
highlights our method.
 Reference Data quality
improvement (C6)
Accounting for 
patient 
characteristics (C8)
Model 
accuracy 
assessment (C4)
Process 
optimization
(Part of C1)
 
 Guastalla et al. [16] +  
 van Hulzen et al. [17] + + +/−  
 Halawa et al. [18] +/− +  
 Tamburis et al. [19] +/−  
 Antunes et al. [20] +  
 Johnson et al. [21] + + +/−  
 Kovalchuck et al. [22] +/− +/− +/−  
 Abohamad et al. [23] +/−  
 Mans et al. [24] +/−  
 Ahmed et al. [25] +  
 Our methodology + + + +  
C5: Do It Yourself (DIY) Healthcare professionals were engaged
throughout the methodology design to ensure practical relevance 
and usability, fostering the adoption of process mining tools in the 
field.
C6: Pay Attention to Data Quality Recognizing the critical impact of 
data quality, especially timestamp granularity and missing values, 
we implemented a preprocessing phase. This includes a novel 
method for estimating missing start timestamps, described in Ap-
pendix.
C8: Look at the Process through the Patient’s Eyes Our simulati-
ons incorporate patient characteristics to reflect real-world vari-
ability. Optimization efforts emphasize patient-centric improve-
ments, such as reducing waiting times, thus enhancing care path-
ways.
Table  2 compares our approach with existing simulation-based 
methodologies in healthcare (cf. Section 7), focusing on how each of 
these approaches addresses selected challenges.
The comparison is conducted at the conceptual and methodological 
level, as most existing works differ substantially in purpose and scope, 
often focusing on process modeling, monitoring, or analysis rather 
than optimization [17,19,21–24]. Conversely, methods such as those 
by Guastalla et al. [16], Halawa et al. [18], and Antunes et al. [20] 
primarily focus on model construction or simulation design, without 
incorporating data quality improvement, model accuracy validation, 
or patient-specific variability. Similarly, Ahmed et al. [25] rely on 
models that are manually built and not extracted from the data: the 
introduction of this stakeholders’ subjectivity can lead to situations in 
which improvement is made on the supposed processes, which are de-
tached from reality. Given these fundamental differences in objectives 
and methodological scope, a direct experimental comparison would not 
yield meaningful insights.
4. Healthcare process improvement via simulations
This section presents our data driven improvement methodology for 
healthcare processes. The methodology is designed mainly for organi-
zational healthcare processes, where resource allocation decisions and 
predictable control-flows are primary levers for improvement.
The methodology is depicted in Fig.  2, where the phases are out-
lined: Process Modeling (A), Model Accuracy Assessment (B) and Process 
Optimization (C). The input is an initial event log , that, after an
Event Log Preparation step, is used for discovering a simulation model, 
with user support if needed. In the second phase, the accuracy of 
the simulation model is assessed via measures that compare simulated 
event logs with the actual one through several perspectives. If the sim-
ulation model is not accurate, the previous modeling step is repeated 
by repairing the discriminated characteristics; otherwise, it is ready 
to be used in the optimization phase. Finally, we use the simulation 
model to obtain simulated event logs, from which statistics are derived 
to guide optimization in changing the simulation parameters. This 
phase is repeated until a stop criterion is reached or until no further 
improvement is possible, returning a simulation model that reflects the 
optimal process configuration.
The approach leverages Process Mining and Process Simulation 
approaches for building an accurate process simulation model (cf. 
Section 4.2). The model accuracy assessment is based on the measure 
proposed by Chapela-Campa et al. [26] (cf. Section 4.3). Once the 
simulator is built and the accuracy is assessed, it can be used by an 
optimization algorithm to solve a determined optimization problem (cf. 
Section 4.4).
4.1. Event log preparation
The starting point is the creation of a proper event log to use as 
input to discover a simulation model. As discussed in Section 2.1.3, the 
discovery of the distribution of the activity duration requires logs to 
contain the events that indicate the starting and completion of each 
activity execution.
Healthcare information systems do not always record the starting 
and completion timestamps of activities, especially when referring 
to visits and tests. In these case, typically the timestamps are the 
completion and taken from the medical reports. Even when present, 
these timestamps often lack sufficient granularity, e.g. only recording 
the date of the activities but not the exact time [27–30]. When some 
timestamps are missing or too course, we need to preprocess the event 
log, and to estimate to refine them.
Fracca et al. [31] introduced a new framework to estimate times-
tamps when they are not present or are not reliable. We have improved 
the framework, which is now capable to scale with larger event logs 
and can estimate the timestamps more precisely. The improved frame-
work is discussed in Appendix. Note that the framework is based on 
simulation and thus requires a simulation model, of course without the 
characterization of the distributions of the activity duration, which the 
framework aims to facilitate.
4.2. Process simulation discovery
Once the event log has been prepared, our methodology aims to 
discover a process simulation model  = (  , ) , from the event log, 
replacing the human subjectivity in creating model with the objective 
behavior observed in the event log (cf. discussion in Section 2.2).
In our methodology, the process model  is mined from the event 
log using the process discovery techniques discussed in Section 2.1.3. 
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
5 

===== PAGE 6 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Fig. 2. Healthcare process improvement via simulations schema. In an initial step the event log is firstly prepared to use it for process discovery techniques, 
and optionally including user validation, for building a process model then enhancing it with multi perspective parameters. Step B assesses the accuracy of 
the simulations. Finally, the last step uses simulations for providing optimal configurations. Rectangles and solid arrows represent the method workflow, while 
elements connected with dashed lines indicate input and output objects.
The simulation parameters  are derived from the event log whenever 
relevant information is available, for example, probabilities of activity 
executions, arrival rates, and temporal distributions (cf. Section 2.2). 
When such information is not present in the event log, it can be 
provided directly by domain stakeholders. This was the case in the 
emergency department study presented in Section 5, where resource-
related data were not available in the event log. Therefore, healthcare 
stakeholders provided role definitions (i.e. groups of resources asso-
ciated with specific activities and their working schedules, such as 
doctors, nurses, and radiologists) and cost information, which were 
then integrated into the simulation parameters.
4.3. Accuracy assessment
A successful application of Process Simulation for process improve-
ment relies on a simulation model that reflects the real process behav-
ior. Conclusions drawn from an unrealistic simulation model lead to 
process redesigns that may not yield improvements or even may worsen 
the performances.
The accuracy of a process model  is usually assessed using con-
formance checking techniques [6]. The goal is to identify and ana-
lyze deviations between the actual execution of the process (i.e. the 
recorded data) and the expected behavior as described by the model. 
Determining the quality of a process model relies on finding the best 
trade-off between four key measures: fitness, precision, generalization
and simplicity. Fitness expresses how well the recorded events in an 
event log align with the process model. A model with high fitness 
indicates that most of the observed traces can be replayed by the 
model. Precision evaluates how much permissive is the process model. 
A model with a low precision is too permissive, allowing for process 
instances not observed in reality. A model with a perfect precision only 
allows traces seen in the event log. Generalization assess whether the 
model can generalize from the observed behavior. A model with a good 
generalization does not overfit the event log. Simplicity measures the 
complexity and understandability of the process model.
Assessing the accuracy of a process model is a key step. Chapela-
Campa et al. [26] proposed a set of metrics with the scope to measure 
distances between the original event log and one generated by a 
process simulator. In our approach, we propose to use these measures, 
additionally to the classic conformance checking ones (cf. Section 4.2), 
to assess the quality of the discovered process simulation model. These 
distances reflect different perspectives, showing discrepancies in the 
simulator models to be repaired. Accuracy is measured with two control 
flow, three temporal, and two congestion measures [26]:
• Control-Flow Log Distance (CFLD) It computes the average 
distance to transform each case on an event log (the simulated 
one) to another case in the another event log (the actual).
• N-Gram Distance (NGD) Given two event logs, it measures the 
‘‘effort’’ to balance the distributions of the 𝑛-grams of the se-
quences of activities observed in the two event logs. Note that the 
Earth Mover Distance between the 2-gram histograms is equiva-
lent to the measure proposed by Leemans et al. [32].
• Absolute Event Distribution (AED) The event logs are decom-
posed to build two time series regarding how many events are 
executed per timestamp, according to a granularity parameter. 
Then it measures the number of events for balancing the two time 
series.
• Circadian Event Distribution (CED) The two event logs are 
partitioned into sub-logs by the day of the week, and then Earth 
Mover Distance between the timestamps distributions is evalu-
ated, measuring the number of events to ‘‘move’’ for balancing 
the histograms of the frequency of events for each weekday of 
the two event logs.
• Relative Event Distribution (RED) It evaluates how accurate 
the generation of the timestamp of a subsequent event is based 
on preceding events. In particular, it measures the ‘‘effort’’ at 
balancing the distributions of the execution times obtained from 
the original and the simulated event logs.
• Case Arrival Rate (CAR) It works in a similar way as AED, where 
the time series consider only the arrival events.
• Cycle Time Distribution (CTD) It measures the Earth Mover 
Distance between the distributions of the cycle time of the traces 
between the two event logs.
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
6 

===== PAGE 7 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
These measures quantify discrepancies between the original and simu-
lated event logs, providing information on potential improvements for 
the simulator. For formal definitions and detailed formulations of these 
metrics, we refer the reader to the work of Chapela-Campa et al. [26]. If 
the simulation model generates event logs close to the actual one, 
according to these metrics, it can be considered accurate. Consequently, 
it can be used for conducting what-if analysis and optimizations.
In this paper, we use normalized metrics, obtained by dividing each 
value by the maximum possible distance, resulting in values ranging 
from 0 to 1. This enables an easier interpretation of model quality: 
values near 0 indicate better similarities between the simulated and 
actual processes, while values that become closer to 1 suggest a poorer 
similarity.
4.4. Process improvement
Process Simulation techniques enable the conduction of what-if ex-
periments, avoiding the need for building or disrupting the real-world 
system, with the scope to analyze and improve processes. By examining 
various what-if scenarios, it is possible to assess the impact of potential 
changes on the processes and the associated protocols and norms that 
define the current process.
In Section 2.2, we discussed how an optimization problem can be 
defined to identify configurations that optimize a specific KPI through 
simulation. In the healthcare domain, a main goal is to improve patient 
journeys while at the same time ensuring that the overall process 
remains sustainable. An optimal resource allocation may improve the 
process in several dimensions, for example, reducing patient waiting 
times, resources overloading, and overall costs. However, some objec-
tives are often conflicting and achieving an effective balance between 
them is crucial. For example, while reducing patient waiting times can 
be accomplished by allocating additional resources and/or expanding 
physical spaces, such improvements inevitably lead to increased oper-
ational costs. However, these costs must align with available budgets 
and policies to ensure the sustainability of the process.
The goal is to improve the balance of multiple KPIs, each modeled 
as a function 𝑓𝑖( , ) that are computed on the behaviors simulated 
by a given simulation model  = ( , ), which of course needs to be 
as accurate a representation of reality as possible.
In particular, the optimization focuses on determining an optimal 
resource allocation  𝑟𝑒𝑠 ⊂ : 
min
 𝑟𝑒𝑠⊂
E
[ 𝑛∑
𝑖=1
𝑤𝑖 ⋅ 𝑓𝑖( , )
]
s.t. 𝑔( , ) ≤ 𝐶
(1)
where 𝑤1, … , 𝑤𝑛 are constant weights, and the constraint 𝑔( , ) ≤
𝐶 ∈ R𝐾 , ensures that certain limitations are respected, such as the 
maximum number of resources or budget constraints.
Weights 𝑤1, … , 𝑤𝑛 are set to normalize the KPI values and/or to 
assign larger or smaller importance to some KPIs over others. In fact, 
Section 5.3.1 illustrates how the weights have been determined for the 
case study presented in this paper, so as to normalize the influence of 
the two KPIs involved.
Note that although optimization targets only resource parameters 
 𝑟𝑒𝑠 ⊂ , the KPI functions 𝑓𝑖( , ) account for all simulation pa-
rameters . In fact, some KPIs, such as waiting time, are influenced 
not only by resource parameters but also by others, such as activity 
execution times: shorter activity durations can free resources earlier, 
reducing waiting times. This distinction ensures that we optimize only 
the resource-related aspects of the process without ignoring the broader 
dependencies captured by the simulation.
To solve this optimization problem, we propose a simulation-based 
algorithm that aims to identify the best trade-off solution. The al-
gorithm begins with an initial resource configuration given by  𝑟𝑒𝑠. 
Note that this initial configuration could represent a resource allocation 
where each role has exactly one resource, or it could be an existing 
configuration from the current system. For each role 𝑅 ⊂ , i.e. a 
set of resources assigned to a specific role, the algorithm computes 
the objective function filtering on the role 𝑅. Specifically, these values 
can be computed from a simulated event log 𝑠𝑖𝑚, generated using 
the simulation model , filtering on the events associated with that 
role. These values reveal the roles where bottlenecks are most likely 
to occur. The algorithm then selects the role with the highest value 
and assigns one additional resource to it, ensuring that all constraints 
are satisfied. This approach is based on the hypothesis that allocating 
additional resources to the most critical role effectively mitigates cur-
rent capacity constraints, thereby reducing bottlenecks and enhancing 
overall process performance. The procedure is then iteratively repeated 
until a certain stopping criterion, e.g. when the objective function does 
not improve. Finally, the algorithm returns a potential optimal solution, 
representing a trade-off between the KPIs.
The robustness of the optimal configuration can be evaluated by 
experimenting with different scenarios, such as an increased patient 
flow. Further analysis can be conducted on various patient attributes to 
show the efficiency of the resource configuration across diverse patient 
profiles.
Since existing simulators did not support the methodology discussed 
here, we implemented our own process simulator in Python, which can 
be downloaded at https://github.com/franvinci/PetriNetBPS . The sim-
ulator builds upon the pm4py library [33], supporting the automatic 
discovery of simulation parameters (cf. Section 4.2).
Our simulator uses Petri net as modeling language [34]; however, 
the BPMN process models that are used in this paper can be easily 
converted into Petri nets [35].
5. Case study
This section presents the evaluation of our method through a new 
real-life case study concerning the process of an emergency department 
of an Italian hospital. The case study is aimed to improve the process 
at the emergency department and fairly minimize the waiting time 
of patients in their journeys, while keeping the process sustainable in 
terms of costs. In particular, the waiting time for a patient is here con-
sidered as the sum of waiting times for each activity carried out at the 
emergency department. The waiting time for an activity for a patient 
is the delay between when the activity is ready to be performed for the 
patient in question and when the activity is actually started. This delay 
is typically caused by capacity constraints (e.g., resources availability), 
which prevent an immediate start of the activity. In this urgency case 
scenario, waiting time represents a critical key performance indica-
tor: lower waiting time reduces the patient risks, and increases patient 
satisfaction because they are treated more promptly. At the same time, 
managing operational costs related to resource usage is essential for 
maintaining a sustainable and efficient healthcare service.
We first introduce the case study, describing the dataset and the 
process (cf. Section 5.1). In Section 5.2 we discuss the modeling and 
the accuracy evaluation steps. In Section 5.3 we applied our method-
ology to derive an optimal resource configuration, further evaluating 
its robustness in variable patient flow scenarios. Finally, Section 5.4 
reports on the discussion of the results with the emergency department 
staff.
5.1. Introduction to the event dataset and process
The construction of the process simulation model for process im-
provement has been based on an event log that comprises 37 942 traces 
with a total of 368 081 events, covering eight months of process data. 
Each trace corresponds to the journey of a patient through the Emer-
gency Department, from triage to discharge. The original data used in 
this study cannot be shared due to confidentiality. Table  1 illustrates 
the excerpt of the event log, which covers the events observed for 
two traces, namely for two patient journeys. Table  3 provides some 
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
7 

===== PAGE 8 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Table 3
Emergency department event description. First column represents an unique 
attribute. The second indicates the number of classes of the associated attribute 
present in the event log. Last column describes the instance attribute.
 Attribute N. Classes Description  
 Case Id. 37 942 The trace identifier.  
 Activity 42 Activity label.  
 Timestamp – Associated timestamp (It could be missing).  
 Lifecycle 2 Associated lifecycle (start or complete).  
 Age – Integer representing the age of the patient.  
 Access type 10 The access type (Autonomous, Ambulance 
without or with doctor, Helicopter, etc.).
 
 Urgency code 5 A color referring to the urgency case 
(White, Blue, Green, Yellow, Red).
 
 Pathology 40 Pathology assigned at the triage phase.  
Table 4
Average, Standard deviation and median cycle time, expressed in minutes, of 
a process instance per triage color. Last row shows the statics computed in the 
full event log, i.e. not filtered by triage color.
 Color group Description Cycle time (min)
 Avg Std Median 
 White - 1 Non-Urgent 191.42 1017.72 104.73 
 Blue - 2 Standard 255.26 3042.29 121.41 
 Green - 3 Urgent 355.22 3210.74 145.63 
 Yellow - 4 Very-Urgent 833.08 5272.11 223.93 
 Red - 5 Immediate 1215.68 7979.34 162.21 
 Complete 486.27 3986.25 159.38 
statistics and information about the event log and the process. The 
event log includes information about the process-instance identifier, 
executed activities with associated timestamps and life-cycles, the age 
of the patient, the access type, an urgency code (triage color), and the 
pathology assigned at the triage phase.
According to the regional regulations, five triage colors are intro-
duced [36]:
1. White code: non-urgent patients whose conditions are not true 
accidents or emergencies.
2. Blue code: standard patients without danger or distress.
3. Green code: urgent patients with serious problems, but appar-
ently stable condition.
4. Yellow code: very-urgent patients with serious illness or injured 
patients whose lives are not in immediate danger.
5. Red code: immediate patients in need of immediate treatment for 
the preservation of life.
Each group can have different treatments and priorities, and patient 
flow may change accordingly to the emergency case. Table  4 reports 
on the cycle times statistics computed for each triage color, comparing 
them with those of the complete event log. A notable observation is that 
an increasing level of urgency leads to higher cycle time and higher 
standard deviation, due to the variations of more urgent cases. Also, 
median cycle times differ significantly from the mean, suggesting the 
presence of several outliers in the case study.
Many events related to the starting of activities are missing. As men-
tioned, this would make it impossible to compute the activity durations. 
Therefore, as discussed in Section 4.1, we preprocessed the event log 
to estimate the timestamps of the missing events related to the starting 
of activities. As mentioned, the technique to estimate the start-event 
timestamp is based on process simulation, thus requires a full-fledged 
simulation model, except for the activity duration distribution.
The process model was initially discovered via Inductive Miner [37], 
and later we show it to the process experts, who were largely satisfied 
but asked to apply some changes. These included adjusting the concur-
rency block after the Triage activity to allow the Visit to be executed in 
Table 5
Frequencies of events and traces for train and test event logs per triage color. 
The column total is the sum of the frequencies of the train and test logs. 
Last row shows the frequencies in the full event log, i.e. not filtered by triage
color.
 Color group Number of events Number of traces
 Train Test Total Train Test Total  
 White - 1 2372 588 2960 384 96 480  
 Blue - 2 31 685 8482 40 167 4436 1220 5656  
 Green - 3 148 054 36 600 184 654 16 454 4122 20 576 
 Yellow - 4 105 390 25 377 130 767 8529 2045 10 574 
 Red - 5 7971 1562 9533 550 106 656  
 Complete 295 472 72 609 368 081 30 353 7589 37 942 
parallel with other activities, and introducing a loop for the Lab Service
activity following Blood Sampling. Fig.  3 shows the model using the 
BPMN notation: in fact, the model is fairly simple and understandable.
5.2. Process simulator modeling & accuracy assessment
To assess the accuracy of the process model and the simulation 
model, we temporally divided the event log into a train and a test 
set. The first 80% of the traces in chronological order were allocated 
to the training set, while the last 20% to the test set, following a 
commonly adopted approach when assessing the accuracy of simulation 
models [10,11,38]. Table  5 shows the frequencies of events and traces 
in both sets, also filtering them by urgency code. The training set is 
used to build the process model and simulation model. The test set is 
employed to compute the metrics defined in Section 4.3, which aim to 
evaluate the accuracy of the discovered simulation model.
Section 5.1 concluded with the discussion of the discovery of the 
process model in Fig.  3. This process model is characterized by fitness 
of 0.97 and precision of 0.82, which were both computed on the test 
sets. The model also exhibits a high level of generalization with a score 
of 0.93, highlighting that it is not overly restricted to the behavior 
observed in the event log. The high values for all of the three metrics 
indicate that the process model is capable to faithfully represent the 
process’ behavior. It is therefore an excellent candidate for use in 
simulation.
For the construction of the simulation model, the parameters were 
trained as discussed in Section 4.2, except for the resources, roles, 
and their calendars, which were defined separately. Unfortunately, the 
event log did not contain resource information for role and calendar 
discovery. The lack of resource-perspective information was compen-
sated by inspecting the hospital information and interviewing process 
experts: the Emergency Department operates 24 h a day, 7 days a 
week. Each role is associated with specific activities. Table  6 provides 
a detailed overview of the number of resources available per hour for 
each role, the associated activities and the cost per hour, which is useful 
for further analysis.
The fully-fledged simulation model was then used ten times to 
generate ten simulated event logs, each containing the same number 
of traces as the test event log. If the simulation model is accurate, the 
simulated and test event logs are sampled from the same distribution. 
The metrics introduced in Section 4.3 are indeed meant to assess this. 
These metrics are then averaged across the ten simulated event logs, 
thus mitigating the intrinsic stochasticity of running a simulation.
These averages are reported in Table  7, and they are also filtered 
by different triage colors. Recall that these metrics are normalized in 
the range [0, 1], where zero indicates a perfect match of the distribution 
between the simulated and test event logs.
CFLD, 2GD, and 3GD metrics generally score relatively low and 
similarly on average, particularly for the most common colors given 
at triage, namely white, blue, and green, which together account for 
70% of the cases (26,711 out of 37,942 traces, as shown in Table 
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
8 

===== PAGE 9 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Fig. 3. Emergency department process model in BPMN notation. The green circle represents the initial state, while the orange represents the final. Labels in 
the rectangles indicates activity tasks. ‘‘+’’ and ‘‘X’’ represent respectively AND and XOR splits/joins.  (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
5). This is largely because the discovery of the simulation model is 
naturally aiming to represent the most frequent case types. Notably, 
3GD, which measures similarity across sequences of three events, tends 
to yield worse scores than 2GD and CFLD: capturing longer activity 
dependencies is inherently more complex. The model performs less 
effectively for traces associated with a red color at triage, especially in 
terms of the 3GD metric. This is likely due to a significant imbalance 
in the training data, where red-colored traces make up only 1.8% (550 
out of 30,353) of the total training traces. Nonetheless, these instances 
are rare and have limited impact on the overall performance of the 
simulation model. As illustrated in Table  7, the weighted average re-
mains largely unaffected by the lower scores associated with executions 
for patients who are assigned a red color at triage. In conclusion, the 
simulation model can well mimic the control-flow perspective of the 
emergency-department healthcare management process.
The other metrics are related to the temporal perspectives and 
assume very low values: this highlights that they are well simulated 
by the model. The temporal perspective is also tightly connected to 
the resource perspective: if the resources, with their schedules and 
assignment to roles and activities, were poorly modeled, this would 
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
9 

===== PAGE 10 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Table 6
Number of resources per role with their associated activities and cost per
hour.
 Role Resources Cost/h Activities  
 per hour  
 Doctors 4 75e Visit, Discharge, ED Service Other  
 Nurses 5 30e Blood Sampling, ECG, PICC, Arterial 
Sampling, ABGA
 
 Triage N. 2 30e Triage  
 Radiologist 1 75e XRay, Eco, CT, NMR, Angio Reporting, Eco 
Execution
 
 Rad. Tech. 2 30e XRay, CT, NMR, Angio Execution,  
 Beds 12 30e (Pediatric) (Medium) Short Stay Unit,
Intensity Care Unit
 
 Consultant 1 per kind 75e Pediatric, Cardiological, Orthopaedic, Surgical, 
Neurological, Urological, Ophthalmologic, 
Gynaecologist, Otorhinolaryngologic Visit
 
Table 7
Simulation distance measures computed averaging the results obtained across 
various simulations. The rows with triage colors show results obtained by 
filtering the test event log and the simulated event logs by the corresponding 
color. Recall values are normalized between 0 and 1, where 0 indicates no 
distance.
 Event log CFLD 2GD 3GD AED CED RED CAR CTD 
 Complete 0.13 0.19 0.25 0.08 0.07 0.01 0.09 0.01 
 White - 1 0.09 0.15 0.18 0.17 0.15 0.05 0.15 0.10 
 Blue - 2 0.07 0.16 0.19 0.08 0.08 0.01 0.09 0.01 
 Green - 3 0.11 0.17 0.22 0.09 0.07 0.01 0.09 0.01 
 Yellow - 4 0.20 0.26 0.35 0.07 0.07 0.01 0.08 0.01 
 Red - 5 0.30 0.36 0.47 0.14 0.08 0.01 0.13 0.02 
affect the realism of the waiting queues, namely the queues of activities 
that are waiting for starting because all resources are not available 
at that point. Poor waiting-queue realism would consequently degrade 
the realism of the temporal perspective: for instance, the simulation’s 
waiting times would not match the real waiting times.
In summary, the simulation model shows a high level of realism 
for most of potential behavior, and thus can be used to improve the 
process, aiming to improve on the resources allocation.
5.3. Process improvement
Once the simulator is built, it can be used for improvement purposes 
as described in Section 4.4. In the emergency department case study, 
one of the main objectives is to identify an optimal resource allocation 
that minimizes patient waiting times while ensuring the process cost 
remains sustainable. Section 5.3.1 presents the optimization results. 
Section 5.3.2 discusses a robustness analysis in cases of varying patient 
flows, i.e. the number of patients arriving at the hospital.
5.3.1. Resource allocation improvement
The case study goal is to minimize the expected waiting time 
of patients into the hospital, thus minimizing the overall times and 
improving their journeys. The expected patient waiting time can be 
computed via simulations. Given a simulated event log 𝑠𝑖𝑚, obtained 
from a simulation model ( , ), with  𝑟𝑒𝑠 ⊂  the set of resource 
parameters (cf. Section 4.4), the expected waiting time is computed as 
follows: 
E [𝑓1( , )]= 1
|𝑠𝑖𝑚|
∑
𝜎∈𝑠𝑖𝑚
∑
𝑒∈𝜎
𝑤𝑡(𝑒) (2)
where 𝑤𝑡(𝑒) indicates the waiting time of the activity instance 𝑎𝑐𝑡(𝑒) to 
which 𝑎𝑐𝑡(𝑒) refers, which is here computed as the difference between 
the time in which 𝑎𝑐𝑡(𝑒) starts and the time in which the activity 
instance preceding 𝑎𝑐𝑡(𝑒) completes. The rationale is that high waiting 
times are due to the congestion of some resources, then increasing 
the number of the resources related to the distinguish roles could 
decrease the waiting times associated with the activities executed by 
them. However, not adequately increasing the number of resources can 
lead to unsustainable costs. Then, the total resource cost must also be 
managed during the optimization process. The goal is hence to find a 
good trade-off between total cost and expected waiting times. The total 
hourly cost can be computed as follows: 
𝑓2( , ) =
∑
𝑟∈
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝑟) (3)
where , 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 ∈  𝑟𝑒𝑠 are the parameters referring to the set of available 
resources , and the hourly cost function 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 returning the cost per 
hour of a certain resource. Note that since 𝑓2( , ) is constant for fixed 
( , ), it follows that E[𝑓2( , )] = 𝑓2( , ).
The optimization problem in Eq.  (1) is defined here using the two 
KPI functions defined in Eqs.  (2) and (3). Specifically, note that: 
E [𝑤1 ⋅ 𝑓1( , ) + 𝑤2 ⋅ 𝑓2( , )]= 𝑤1 ⋅ E [𝑓1( , )]
+ 𝑤2 ⋅ E [𝑓2( , )]
= 𝑤1 ⋅ E [𝑓1( , )]+ 𝑤2 ⋅ 𝑓2( , )
(4)
where the weights are selected to normalize and assign equal impor-
tance to both KPIs, 𝑓1 and 𝑓2. Specifically, 𝑤1 and 𝑤2 are determined 
based on the maximum possible values that their corresponding KPI 
functions can achieve. The weight 𝑤1 is set to 1∕45.25, where 45.25 min 
represents the current average waiting time. The weight 𝑤2 is set to 
1∕(1830 + 𝑁 ⋅ 75), where 1830e is the current hourly cost, and the 
term 𝑁 ⋅ 75 accounts for the potential increase in cost after adding 
𝑁 resources—each contributing to a maximum of 75e per hour (cf. 
Table  6). This ensures that both performance measures are scaled 
comparably, allowing for balanced optimization.
For this case study, we defined the constraint where resources from 
the current configuration must be retained. Removing resources is not 
permitted, as it could lead to unfair conclusions where certain resources 
might be laid-off. To satisfy this, we initiated the algorithm by using 
the current configuration (see Table  6), thus ensuring that its resources 
cannot be removed. The optimization problem is then solved by using 
the algorithm proposed in Section 4.4.
We experimented with a maximum of 10 iterations. The most sub-
stantial improvements occur within the first two iterations, after which 
the optimization process stabilizes. Fig.  4 illustrates the average waiting 
time (y-axis) and total hour cost (x-axis) for each configuration, high-
lighting the rapid initial gains followed by a plateau in performance. 
The optimal solution, i.e. the one minimizing the objective function, 
is highlighted in green. Specifically, it chooses as the best configura-
tion the one obtained after two iterations, leading to a configuration 
with one more radiologist and one more orthopedic, which is expected 
to decrease the waiting time of ca. 89%, in exchange for a modest 
hourly-cost increase of ca. 8%.
5.3.2. Readiness analysis to sudden workload peaks
Once the best configuration was identified, we focused on the ability 
of the system to tackle sudden peaks in the arrival rate, e.g. due to an 
emergency scenario. Section 1 discussed the importance of healthcare 
systems to respond to sudden peaks. This readiness analysis adopted 
the methodology from [22] by adjusting the patient flow. Specifically, 
we tested arrival rates with a patient-flow ratio set at 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 
and 2.0 times the baseline arrival rate of the original configuration. 
For example, a patient ratio of 0.5 corresponds to a scenario in which 
the patient flow decreases of 50%, 1 to the current patient flow, 1.5 
signifies a 50% increase and 2 a scenario in which patient arrivals 
double.
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
10 

===== PAGE 11 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Fig. 4. Average waiting time (in minutes) per total cost per hour (in e). Each point represent a resource configuration. The red point represents the results using 
the initial, i.e. the current, resource allocation. The green point indicates the optimal solution.  (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, 
the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 5. Average waiting time (in minutes) per patient flow ratio. Results are obtained averaging values from various simulations. The red line represent results 
obtained using the current configuration with various patient flow ratio. The green highlights those obtained by using the optimal configuration identified by 
our method.  (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
For each patient ratio, we simulated 10 event logs and computed the 
average of the waiting times across these simulations. The results are 
depicted in Fig.  5, and reveal a better readiness of the improved process 
configuration to emergency scenarios, compared to the initial process 
configuration: waiting times exhibit a significantly faster increase for 
the initial process configuration. This highlights the efficacy of our 
optimization approach in managing workflow efficiency and mitigat-
ing delays, thereby ensuring more stable and predictable performance 
under varying patient ratios.
5.4. Discussion with ED staff: Model check and operational insights
The simulation model and the corresponding results were presented 
to ED staff in a dedicated debriefing session. The discussion served two 
purposes: (i) a plausibility check of model structure and performance 
realism against day-to-day operations, and (ii) interpretation of sce-
nario results to surface pragmatic improvement actions. Overall, ED 
clinicians confirmed that the control-flow, resource roles, and perfor-
mance levels reflected by the model align with how the ED actually 
works. Specifically, the set of activities and routing logic mirrored 
their experience of parallel diagnostic and/or treatment paths following 
triage and visit. This is consistent with the process model previously 
discovered, which they recognized as a faithful abstraction of their 
workflows.
A key point of convergence between the simulated evidence and 
staff perception concerned imaging. Teams emphasized that radiology 
behaves as a heavily utilized single ‘‘server’’ that periodically attracts a 
surge of simultaneous requests from multiple pathways (e.g., imaging 
after the initial visit, or in parallel with blood sampling/lab work), 
creating queue build-ups during peak windows. This observation is 
aligned with the model structure and with the resource distribution 
(cf. Table  6), which shows limited radiological reporting/execution 
capacity relative to the number of upstream activities that can generate 
demand. In practice, this concurrency produces short periods of high 
contention even if average loads look manageable, explaining why 
Radiology appears as the dominant bottleneck in both data and prac-
tice. Conversely, the team found the result concerning the orthopedic 
specialist less intuitive. While an orthopedist dedicated to the ED is 
clinically valuable, they noted that orthopedic consults do not arrive 
at a steady pace; instead, quiet periods alternate with bursts. Under 
these conditions, a single, fixed consult channel can intermittently 
inflate waits for the subset of patients requiring orthopedics, even when 
other resources are momentarily available. This observation does not 
contradict the what-if analyses that identified an additional orthopedist 
(together with a radiologist) as part of a cost-effective configuration 
overall; rather, it highlights that consult scheduling and flexibility 
matter when arrivals are bursty. Staff also recalled that, in prior years, 
orthopedists remained on their ward and were called in when needed, 
rather than being assigned as a dedicated ED resource. In that time, 
they had longer average waiting times for patients, but they were a 
little more flexible when they had demand peaks.
The staff’s appraisal of improvement options was generally positive. 
There was strong consensus that increasing radiology capacity dedi-
cated to ED demand, for example, via additional radiologist coverage 
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
11 

===== PAGE 12 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
during peak hours (also shared by other EDs since the reporting is 
possible ‘‘online’’) and/or an extra technician on high-demand shifts, 
is a sensible and immediately actionable lever. This judgment coheres 
with the what-if evidence showing that targeted additions on the 
imaging side yield outsized reductions in average waiting time at 
modest marginal cost. Although the exact configuration will depend 
on numerous factors, the direction of change was considered realistic 
and operationally acceptable by the ED leadership. At the same time, 
rather than simply ‘‘adding’’ more dedicated orthopedic coverage, the 
discussion suggested organizational refinements to absorb burstiness 
without investing too many resources and creating new rigid bottle-
necks: e.g., on-call orthopedist responding within set time windows 
when the ED consult queue exceeds a threshold or pooling ED orthope-
dic with the ones assigned to the hospital ward for cross-cover during 
peaks.
6. Threats to validity and future directions
While our methodology has shown its value through the case study 
presented in this work, both the methodology and its empirical evalua-
tion are subject to certain assumptions and limitations that may affect 
their generalizability and applicability to other healthcare contexts. 
In this section, we discuss the main methodological and experimental 
assumptions and limitations, and outline possible avenues for future 
research.
6.1. Limitations of the methodology
The proposed methodology builds upon traditional process discov-
ery techniques that assume the availability of one representative event 
log. While our emergency-department case study relied on a single 
information system, other health-care processes can be distributed 
over multiple departments, each with a different information system, 
leading to fragmented and incomplete event data. It may be the case 
that the scattered event data from different source share the same 
identifier (e.g. the social security number) or, if they have different 
identifiers, these can be linked to each other (e.g. the patient identifier 
in one system and the social security number in other). However, we 
acknowledge that this is not guaranteed: if the fragmented event data 
cannot be merged, we cannot have a single representative event log, 
and thus our methodology, and more in general Process Mining, cannot 
be applied.
The methodology is particularly effective for well-structured health-
care processes, where workflows follow standardized procedures, re-
sources can be allocated in advance, and process logic can be accurately 
captured in an event log. Conversely, highly flexible or knowledge-
intensive processes, such as those involving personalized patient care 
pathways or complex diagnostic coordination, may not be fully cap-
tured by our approach. As illustrated in the emergency department case 
study, our methodology is best suited for organizational healthcare 
processes, following the categorization proposed by Lenz et al. [7], 
while its applicability may be more limited in contexts characterized 
by high variability, uncertainty, or extensive clinical decision-making.
In representing temporal aspects, we assume that delays are only 
caused by resource capacity constraints. This tends to be true for pro-
cesses that time critical, such as in hospital’s emergency departments, 
which is indeed the domain of the case study in Section 5. As a 
matter of fact, Table  7 reports that the simulated event log shows a 
distance equal to 0.07, with respect to Cycle Time Distribution (CTD), 
where distances are normalized between 0 and 1. Since CTD is related 
to the temporal properties of the (simulated) process, this illustrates 
that the assumption holds for the case study in question. We however 
acknowledge that this abstraction does not explicitly model intricate 
temporal dependencies or synchronization constraints that may occur 
in real-world healthcare workflows [39], such as minimum or max-
imum time distances between activities [40] or externally induced 
delays [41]. Consequently, for processes where inter-activity timing 
and coordination play a critical role, more advanced temporal modeling 
techniques would be needed to accurately capture process dynamics.
Moreover, our methodology primarily focuses on the organizational 
dimension of healthcare process improvement: resource allocation, 
cost, and time. In the specific case study discussed Section 5, a modest 
increase in personnel cost of ca. 8% leads to the patient’s waiting time 
to reduce to 11% of the original situation. However, Challenge C8 [15] 
also indicates that process optimization should also be viewed ‘‘through 
the patient’s eyes’’. This includes minimizing unnecessary diagnostic 
procedures, ensuring that invasive examinations are performed only 
when non-invasive ones are inconclusive, and designing diagnostic and 
therapeutic pathways that reduce patient burden. Addressing such as-
pects would require extending the health-care methodology in Table  2 
to allow altering the control-flow model during the methodology, along 
with increasing simulation-model expressiveness to explicitly encode 
clinical constraints and dependencies among diagnostic and therapeutic 
procedures
Finally, the proposed methodology does not account for concept 
drift or process seasonality, which are common in real-world health-
care settings (cf. Challenges 3 and 10 in [15]). For instance, patient 
arrivals may significantly increase during specific times of the year 
(e.g., flu season) or fluctuate across different hours of the day. These 
temporal variations can affect the reliability of the optimization if not 
properly considered.
6.2. Limitations related to the case study
We acknowledge that the case study presented in Section 5 refers 
to a single department, namely the emergency department, and does 
not contain more intricate coordination and temporal dependencies, 
such as those present in the case study presented in [42]. However, as 
discussed in Section 6.1, if a complete event log could be constructed by 
integrating traces from multiple departments, every indication suggests 
our approach could still be applicable, while we would need to assess 
the capability to model the specific intricate coordination and temporal 
dependencies, if they were present. Therefore, this limitation largely 
reflects constraints in data availability rather than a deficiency of the 
methodology itself.
In addition, as is common in healthcare process data (cf. Section 7), 
the event log also contains missing information regarding activity 
starts and incomplete resource attributes. These gaps were addressed 
by estimating missing timestamps and retrieving resource information 
through consultation with stakeholders. However, this procedure may 
introduce minor inaccuracies and, since resource data are not linked at 
the event level, detailed analyses could be affected.
Furthermore, the evaluation of the simulation model and its results 
relied on interpretative feedback gathered through discussions with 
ED personnel rather than on a structured approach. While this par-
ticipatory approach provides valuable contextual insights and fosters 
practical relevance, it may limit the reproducibility of the results.
Finally, the proposed improvements have not been implemented or 
evaluated in real-life environments. While the data-driven simulation 
framework allows the process to be modeled and analyzed in an objec-
tive, evidence-based manner, all optimizations reported in this study 
are based on simulated scenarios rather than real-life execution.
6.3. Future work
In light of the aforementioned limitations, future research will aim 
to extend the proposed methodology to better capture the temporal and 
behavioral complexity inherent in many healthcare processes. As dis-
cussed, the current framework primarily explains activity durations and 
waiting times through resource availability. However, in real clinical 
environments, additional sources of delay often play a significant role. 
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
12 

===== PAGE 13 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Incorporating such external delay factors, as addressed by Chapela-
Campa et al. [41], could improve the realism and predictive accuracy 
of the simulation framework.
Moreover, we currently build on imperative process modeling no-
tation (cf. Petri net and BPMN models). Their structuredness might 
not be satisfactory to model the flexibility that is typical of healthcare 
processes. To enable flexible control-flow logic, we plan to integrate 
declarative process modeling into the simulation framework. Declara-
tive models, such as those expressed in the Declare language, define 
behavioral constraints without enforcing strict execution orders, mak-
ing them suitable for dynamic and knowledge-intensive healthcare 
processes [42–45]. Advances in declarative process simulation [46] and 
multi-perspective model discovery [47] provide promising foundations 
for capturing variability and clinical decision interdependencies more 
effectively.
An additional promising direction for future research concerns the 
management of concept drift in healthcare processes. Clinical work-
flows naturally evolve as patient populations, medical protocols, and 
resource conditions change, potentially affecting the stability of dis-
covered models. Recent research [48] proposes techniques for adapting 
to drift in process execution data, ensuring models remain accurate 
as conditions evolve. Building on this approach, future extensions of 
our methodology could incorporate drift-aware simulation mechanisms 
that dynamically update model parameters, thus preserving accuracy 
and reliability in continuously evolving healthcare environments.
Finally, future research should focus on a systematic approach to 
evaluate the proposed simulation model and its results through the 
structured involvement of healthcare professionals. This evaluation 
could employ systematic approaches such as focus groups and semi-
structured interviews to ensure reproducibility. Moreover, additional 
optimization strategies identified by ED staff could be experimentally 
evaluated within the simulation environment. Such additional testing 
would yield stronger empirical evidence of the model’s practical utility 
and its effectiveness in supporting data-driven decision-making and 
operational optimization in complex healthcare systems.
7. Related works
The healthcare sector increasingly leverages data-driven methodolo-
gies to gain insights into complex processes and identify opportunities 
for improvement. In this section, we first review the application of 
Process Mining techniques for analyzing and understanding healthcare 
workflows using event data (cf. Section 7.1). Next, we discuss the 
literature on process simulation approaches for modeling, evaluating, 
and improving healthcare processes (cf. Section 7.2).
7.1. Process mining in healthcare
Process execution data stored in Healthcare Information Systems 
can be used through Process Mining techniques to support the manage-
ment and optimization of healthcare processes. Extensive research has 
explored the use of Data and Process Mining techniques for analyzing 
these processes using event data, revealing distinguishing characteris-
tics and associated challenges to be addressed [15,49–54].
A significant part of works focused on analyzing and modeling 
processes to draw conclusions and provide recommendations for im-
provement. Augusto et al. [27] used process data to analyze the impact 
of the COVID-19 pandemic in an Australian hospital. Mans et al. [55] 
used Process Mining to gain insight into the care flow of a Dutch hos-
pital from three different perspectives. Leemans et al. [56] introduced 
a novel model incorporating process-based micro-costing estimations, 
which can be used in a decision analytics context. In [57] the authors 
proposed a method to model surgical processes that involve experts 
in the healthcare domain. Rabbi et al. [58] analyzed an emergency 
department process using Process Mining algorithms.
Interpretability and understandability pose significant challenges in 
the healthcare sector [53,59]. Although Process Mining techniques are 
recognized as white-box, many models remain complex and difficult 
to interpret. Other works focused on enhancing the understandability 
of process models in the Healthcare domain. Li et al. [60] proposed a 
novel process model miner to construct interpretable process models 
for complex medical processes. Furthermore, [61] demonstrated the 
benefits of the interaction of a domain expert in improving the quality 
and understandability of process models.
Healthcare processes tend to exhibit substantial variability [15], for 
example, certain process paths can be taken only by some patients with 
specific characteristics. Considering the variability of process actors is 
essential for effective process management. Andrews et al. [62] devel-
oped an approach to detect process variations between various groups 
of patients. In [29] the authors introduced a Process Mining method-
ology to explore the disease-specific care process. Mazhar et al. [63] 
proposed an automatic method incorporating the stochastic perspective 
to determine the likelihood of a particular pathway for certain patient 
cohorts. Bakhshi et al. [64] applied Process Mining algorithms to find 
decision rules based on features available in the event logs, revealing 
patient trajectories patterns.
Another addressed key challenge is to deal with low quality data. 
Real life data from Healthcare Information System often lack precision 
and are improperly collected, resulting in inaccurate data analysis and 
process modeling leading to not effective recommendations and opti-
mizations. Several studies proposed alternatives for addressing these 
issues in the Healthcare domain. Vanbrabant et al. [65] proposed a 
framework to categorize possible data quality problems in emergency 
department electronic healthcare records. In [66], 27 possible classes 
of quality issues are subdivided into four main categories: missing, 
incorrect, imprecise, irrelevant data. Suriadi et al. [67] document a 
collection of typical quality problems in event logs; Leonardi et al. [68] 
introduced an explainable methodology using Deep Learning models 
for process trace quality assessment.
Van Hulzen et al. [69] analyzed the effects of data quality issues on 
simulation outcomes, showing the importance of domain knowledge in 
addressing this challenge using a case study in the radiology depart-
ment of a hospital. Benevento et al. [28] validated the suitability of 
Interactive Process Discovery in handling low quality data with a real 
dataset from an Italian hospital, involving the hospital staff; Martin 
et al. [70] applied interactive data cleaning in an outpatient clinic’s 
appointment system case study.
Focusing on the temporal perspective, Fischer et al. [71] presented 
an automated approach to identify and quantify timestamp imper-
fections, defining 15 related metrics. Dixit et al. [30] proposed an 
interactive framework to repair ordering imperfections in event logs.
7.2. Healthcare process simulation
Process simulation is a key methodology for monitoring, analyzing 
and improving healthcare processes. By building data-driven models 
based on real-world event logs, simulation enables the exploration of 
different scenarios through what-if analyses and supports evidence-
based decision-making. Typically, process models are derived using 
Process Mining techniques, which focus on extracting control-flow, 
temporal, and resource perspectives from healthcare event data [5,72]. 
Some works provided automated frameworks for discovering simula-
tion models [10], resulting in accurate models based on process event 
data, avoiding biases that could arise from relying solely on the sub-
jectivity feedback of the process actors. Additionally, Process Mining 
techniques have been compared with Deep Learning approaches, show-
ing that these could lead to more accurate simulations, particularly 
in the temporal perspective [38]. However, although Explainable AI 
methods can enhance the interpretability of such models, they do 
not enable direct modification of model behavior, thus limiting their 
applicability for performing what-if analyses [38].
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
13 

===== PAGE 14 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
However, Deep Learning techniques are black-box, making them 
unsuitable for certain applications and for performing what-if analy-
ses [38].
Several works have focused on developing simulation models specif-
ically for healthcare applications. For instance, Guastalla et al. [16] 
employed simulation to improve work scheduling in hospital envi-
ronments, leveraging historical data to enhance operational planning. 
Van Hulzen et al. [17] developed a process simulation framework 
to support capacity management decisions within a radiology depart-
ment, combining data driven model construction with domain expert 
validation.
Halawa et al. [18] proposed a simulation-based approach to opti-
mize the physical layout and patient flow in a cardiovascular clinic, 
aiming to improve operational efficiency. Similarly, Tamburis et al. [19] 
focused on creating simulation models to evaluate performance indica-
tors and benchmark healthcare services.
Antunes et al. [20] integrated simulation into an optimization 
framework, using it to compare baseline and improved scheduling 
policies in an Emergency Department setting. Johnson et al. [21] 
introduced the ClearPath methodology, which incorporates simulation 
to explore care pathways while documenting data quality aspects 
throughout the modeling process.
Further approaches have emphasized patient-centered simulation. 
Kovalchuk et al. [22] developed a conceptual framework combining 
Process Mining and simulation to model clinical pathways for different 
groups of patients, thus improving the realism of the simulations. 
Abohamad et al. [23] applied simulation to identify bottlenecks and 
explore improvements in emergency department operations.
Mans et al. [24] investigated the impact of IT system introduction 
on healthcare processes through simulation, providing insights into the 
technological effects on operational performance. Finally, Ahmed and 
Alkhamis [25] used simulation modeling based on expert interviews to 
design optimization strategies for resource allocation in an emergency 
department context.
8. Conclusion
Optimizing processes is a critical and complex challenge in the 
healthcare domain. Optimal process configuration can enhance patient 
journeys, reduce costs, and improve the overall quality of care. Process 
Mining techniques offer powerful tools for modeling and analyzing 
real-life processes [6]. The resulting process models can be used for 
simulation purposes, enabling stakeholders to observe how potential 
changes might impact performance without the high costs and risks 
associated with real-world experimentation. Assessing the accuracy of 
these models is crucial. In fact, findings derived from experiments 
performed using an inaccurate process model could be implausible and, 
hence, not acceptable.
In this paper, we proposed a methodology which leverages Process 
Simulation to support the optimization of healthcare processes. The 
proposed methodology begins with the application of Process Discov-
ery techniques, which are used to extract a process model from real 
execution data. This model is then enhanced with various perspective 
parameters — such as time, cost, and resource usage — to provide a 
more complete and accurate representation of the actual process. The 
accuracy of the simulation model is assessed using the metrics proposed 
by Chapela-Campa et al. [26] which consider the different perspectives. 
Finally, the simulation model can be used for optimization purposes. 
We specifically introduce an automated optimization approach that 
uses simulation to identify optimal process configurations. The goal 
of this optimization is to balance multiple Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs), such as minimizing patient waiting time while controlling or 
reducing operational costs.
We applied our methodology in an emergency department case 
study. In this context, we formulated a stochastic optimization problem 
aimed at identifying a resource configuration that would reduce patient 
waiting times without leading to unsustainable increases in cost.
Finally, we evaluated the robustness of this optimal configuration 
through a series of what-if scenarios in which we varied patient flow 
conditions to simulate potential crisis situations. Findings show the 
optimal configuration of resources maintains more stable performance, 
if compared with the current one, in critical scenarios, suggesting 
its effectiveness not only under normal conditions but also in more 
demanding or uncertain operational contexts.
Reproducibility
GDPR considerations and ethical constraints have prevented shar-
ing the real event log that was used as case study in this article. 
The real event log would potentially allow disclosing sensitive clinic 
information about patients that were tried in the hospital consid-
ered as case study. Specific pathologies determine specific activity 
paths, and these paths could be reverse-engineered to infer the un-
derlying condition. Similar reasoning applies to age, timestamps, and 
other patient-related attributes. A severe form of anonymization could 
make the re-identification of individual patients practically impossible, 
thereby ensuring compliance with the GDPR. However, such a dataset 
would be significantly altered: as a consequence, it would no longer 
enable reproducibility of the results. To ensure reproducibility while 
complying with GDPR and ethical constraints, we provide a fully 
synthetic event log that statistically and structurally resembles the 
original dataset used in this study. The synthetic log is generated using 
the ‘baseline’ technique described in [73] and is publicly available 
at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18785676. The similarity between 
the original and synthetic logs has been quantitatively assessed using 
the measures proposed by Chapela-Campa et al. [26], including 2GD 
and 3GD for control flow, AED and RED for event distributions, CAR 
and CTD for temporal characteristics, and CED for circadian event 
patterns. In particular, the computed distances, normalized in the range 
[0,1], are 2GD = 0.0185, 3GD = 0.0333, AED = 0.0431, RED =
0.0003, CAR = 0.0592, CTD = 0.0004, and CED = 0.0858. These values 
indicate a close correspondence between the original and synthetic 
logs, confirming that the synthetic data preserve the main behavioral 
and temporal properties relevant to the simulation experiments. While 
exact numerical replication of all results cannot be guaranteed due to 
the synthetic nature of the data, the released log enables independent 
reproduction of the methodological pipeline and supports transparent 
validation of the reported findings without exposing sensitive patient 
information.
Ethics statement
This research project was approved by the University Bioethics 
Committee of the University of Pisa on 23/04/2025 (Resolution No. 
23/2025), which considered the research project to be in line with 
the principles of free and responsible science, including adequacy with 
respect to the profiles of data protection: all procedures were performed 
in compliance with relevant laws and institutional guidelines.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Francesco Vinci: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, 
Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. Davide Aloini: Validation, Resources, Investiga-
tion. Elisabetta Benevento: Validation, Resources, Investigation, Data 
curation. Alessandro Stefanini: Validation, Resources, Investigation, 
Funding acquisition, Data curation. Francesca Zen: Software. Massi-
miliano de Leoni: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Validation, Supervision, Resources, Investigation, Funding acquisition, 
Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
14 

===== PAGE 15 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
The research work by F. Vinci is financially supported by MUR 
(PNRR) and University of Padua. The work by D. Aloini, E. Benevento, 
A. Stefanini, and M. de Leoni has been supported by the European 
Union – Next Generation EU under the National Recovery and Re-
silience Plan (NRRP), Mission 4 Component 2 Investment 1.1 - Call 
PRIN 2022 PNRR No. 1409 of September 14, 2022 of Italian Ministry 
of University and Research; Project P20222XM58 (subject area: SH - 
Social Sciences and Humanities) Emergency medicine 4.0: an integrated 
data-driven approach to improve emergency department performances.
Appendix. Assessing the quality of event data: Start timestamp 
estimation
In this appendix, we present a novel approach for estimating the 
start timestamps of events in an event log when they are missing. We 
extend the work of Fracca et al. [31], introducing a new algorithm 
designed to improve both precision and computational efficiency. In 
particular, in this paper we propose to search the parameters for 
estimating the start timestamps using optimization functions depending 
on the activity leveraging on an algorithm able to reach better local 
optima.
The general idea is to develop an accurate process simulator that 
relies exclusively on the information available in the original event log 
and generates simulated event logs by varying the activity duration pa-
rameters. The objective is to find the model that produces runs that are 
closest to the initial event log. Finally, the parameters employed in the 
optimal simulation model can be applied to estimate start timestamps 
within the original event log.
In the following, a first section outlines preliminary concepts rel-
evant for the definition of our method. Appendix  A.2 describe the 
methodology and finally Appendix  A.3 reports the evaluation results 
on two different case studies, comparing them to those obtained using 
the algorithm proposed in [31].
A.1. Preliminaries
In this section, basic definitions of events, traces, and event logs 
are presented. Then, temporal perspective definitions are provided to 
define the method in a following section. 
Definition 1 (Events). Let  be a set of activities,   a set of timestamps, 
 a set of resources,  = {𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡, 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑒} the set of lifecycles. An event 
(𝑎, 𝑡, 𝑟, 𝑖) ∈ × ×× is a tuple indicating that a resource 𝑟 performed 
(the start or the end, according to 𝑖, of) an activity 𝑎 at timestamp 𝑡.
In the remainder, given an event 𝑒 = (𝑎, 𝑡, 𝑟, 𝑖), we define 𝑎𝑐𝑡(𝑒) = 𝑎, 
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒) = 𝑡, 𝑟𝑒𝑠(𝑒) = 𝑟, 𝑙𝑖𝑓 𝑒(𝑒) = 𝑖. 
Definition 2 (Traces & Event Logs). Let  be the universe of events 
defined over a set of activities . A trace 𝜎 = ⟨𝑒1, … , 𝑒𝑛⟩ ∈  ∗
 is a 
sequence of events such that for all 1 ≤ 𝑖 < 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛, 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒𝑖) ≤ 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒𝑗 ). An 
event log is a set of traces, i.e.  ⊆  ∗
.
In the remainder, we use the abbreviation 𝑒 ∈  to indicate that 
there exists a trace in  that contains the event 𝑒. Also, we omit the 
subfix  from  and  when it is clear from the context.
The following defines the time interval, in terms of temporal units, 
between two consecutive end events in a trace. This definition will be 
useful for formulating the objective function to minimize in Appendix 
A.2. 
Definition 3 (Inter-Event Time). Let  ⊆  ∗ be an event log. Let  ={ 𝜎 ∣ 𝜎 = ⟨𝑒 ∣ 𝑙𝑖𝑓 𝑒(𝑒) = 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑒 ∀𝑒 ∈ 𝜎⟩ ∀𝜎 ∈ }  be the sub-event log of 
complete events. We define the inter-event time function 𝛥 ∶  →(  → R+)  s.t. 𝛥 (𝜎) = 𝛿𝜎 , where given a trace 𝜎 = ⟨𝑒1, … , 𝑒𝑛⟩ ∈ , for 
all 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛: 
𝛿𝜎
( 𝑒𝑖
) =
{
0 if 𝑖 = 1
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒𝑖) − 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒𝑖−1) otherwise
(A.1)
where 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒𝑖) − 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒𝑖−1) represents the duration time between event 
𝑒𝑖 and 𝑒𝑖−1.
These durations are used to estimate the following distribution 
functions for each activity in an event log: 
Definition 4 (Activity Inter-Event Time Distribution). Let  be an event 
log defined over a set of activities . We define the inter-event time 
distribution function 𝛷 ∶  → ( R+ → [0, 1]
)  where 𝛷 (𝑎) indicates 
distribution of inter-event times 𝛿𝜎 (𝑒) where 𝑒 ∈ 𝜎 s.t. 𝑎𝑐𝑡(𝑒) = 𝑎, for all 
𝜎 ∈ .
A.2. Method
The starting points of the method are an event log  defined over 
a set of activities , and a simulator model  = (  , )  where  is a 
process model, such as a Petri Net or a BPMN model, and  is a set of 
parameters. Since we aim at estimating the event log start timestamps, 
we assume that 𝑙𝑖𝑓 𝑒(𝑒) = 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑒 ∀𝑒 ∈ .
To estimate the starting event timestamp of an event 𝑒 ∈  s.t. 
𝑙𝑖𝑓 𝑒(𝑒) = 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑒 and 𝑎𝑐𝑡(𝑒) = 𝑎, we formulate the problem as finding a 
value 𝛼 (𝑎) ∈ [0, 1]. Particularly, the starting event timestamp 𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(𝑒) ∈
 , where   is the set of timestamps, can be parameterized as: 
𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡(𝑒) = 𝛼 (𝑎) ⋅ 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 (𝑒) + (1 − 𝛼 (𝑎)) ⋅ 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 (𝑒) (A.2)
where 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒) is the minimum timestamp when event 𝑒 could have 
started. We estimate the minimum starting timestamp 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒) for an 
event 𝑒 as follows: 
Definition 5 (Minimum Starting Timestamp). Let  be an event log s.t. 
𝑙𝑖𝑓 𝑒(𝑒) = 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑒 for all 𝑒 ∈ . Given a trace 𝜎 = ⟨𝑒1, … , 𝑒𝑛⟩ ∈ , the 
minimum starting timestamp of 𝑒𝑖 with 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛, such that 𝑟𝑒𝑠(𝑒) = 𝑟
is defined as
𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 ( 𝑒𝑖
) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
(
𝑒𝑟
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣
)
if 𝑖 = 1
𝑚𝑎𝑥
(
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 ( 𝑒𝑖−1
) , 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
(
𝑒𝑟
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣
))
otherwise
where 𝑒𝑟
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣 ∈  is the previous event in  performed by the resource 
𝑟, i.e. 𝑟𝑒𝑠(𝑒𝑟
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣) = 𝑟, 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒𝑟
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣) ≤ 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒𝑖) and ∄ 𝑒 ∈  s.t. 𝑟𝑒𝑠(𝑒) = 𝑟 and 
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒) > 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒𝑟
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣).
If such 𝑒𝑟
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣 does not exist, i.e. resource 𝑟 has not performed any 
event previously, we set 𝑒𝑟
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣 as the first event of , i.e. 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒𝑟
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣) ≤
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒) ∀ 𝑒 ∈ .
The intuition is to consider both the control flow and the resource 
perspective. We hypothesize that an event can only start after the 
previous one has completed and that the resource performing the 
activity cannot be engaged in multiple activities simultaneously. These 
assumptions are legit for many processes, particularly in the healthcare 
domain, where patients and resources (such as doctors and nurses) 
hardly perform activities in parallel. Fig.  A.7 illustrates this hypothesis.
The goal is to determine the optimal set of parameters 𝛼 (𝑎) for all 
𝑎 ∈ . The method is summarized by the schema illustrated in Fig. 
A.6. It starts with an initial configuration 𝛼 = {𝛼(𝑎) ∣ 𝑎 ∈ } enriching 
the event log  with estimated start events, given using Eq.  (A.2), 
resulting in an event log 𝛼. This is then used to enhance a given 
process simulator with temporal information (e.g. activity execution 
time distributions). The simulator is subsequently run to generate a 
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
15 

===== PAGE 16 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Fig. A.6. Start Timestamps Estimator schema. It starts by initializing an alpha parameter for each activity label. Then they are used for enriching the event log 
 obtaining an event log 𝛼 with start timestamps. A simulator model  is enhanced using the temporal information derived from 𝛼, and then it generates a 
simulated event log 𝑠𝑖𝑚. The simulated event log is compared with the actual one, and finally a stopping criterion determines whether to stop the procedure or 
update the alpha parameters and proceed in an iterative way.
Fig. A.7. Schema representing the concepts of previous event in a trace by control-flow and previous event performed by a resource. For the event 𝑒, 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝑒)
is the timestamp related to the event 𝑒, and 𝑟𝑒𝑠(𝑒) = 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 𝐵  the resource performing the activity 𝑎𝑐𝑡(𝑒). Looking at the trace perspective, 𝑒1 is the previous 
event in the trace by control-flow, and 𝑒2 the previous event performed by 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 𝐵 . The green box represents the timeline range in which the event 𝑒 could 
be started.  (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Source: Figure from [31].
simulated event log 𝑠𝑖𝑚. Finally, 𝑠𝑖𝑚 is compared with , and the set 
𝛼 is adjusted to minimize defined errors. The procedure is repeated for 
a number of iterations or until a stopping criterion is reached.
Here we define the errors to minimize as the Wasserstein dis-
tance [74] between the activity inter-event time distributions (see 
Definition  4) of the original event log and the simulated one for each 
activity 𝑎 ∈ : 
𝜖𝑎(, 𝑠𝑖𝑚) = ∫
+∞
0
||𝛷 (𝑎) − 𝛷𝑠𝑖𝑚 (𝑎)|| (A.3)
In practice, this measure is approximated using the observed inter-event 
times from both event logs.
To find the optimal set of 𝛼 parameters, we employ a local search-
based algorithm, as detailed in Algorithm 1. The algorithm iteratively 
refines the interval [0, 1] for each 𝛼(𝑎), progressively halving it and 
moving towards the extremity that corresponds to the minimum error 
until a certain stopping criterion, such as a number of iterations or until 
the errors do not improve.
In Algorithm 1, 𝑙[𝑎] and 𝑟[𝑎] represent the left and the right bounds 
of the interval for each 𝛼, initialized to 0 and 1, respectively. The 
function 𝚜𝚒𝚖𝚞𝚕𝚊𝚝𝚎(, , 𝛼) returns the simulated event log as pre-
viously described and illustrated in Fig.  A.6. For each 𝑎 ∈ , the 
errors for the intervals are stored in 𝑒𝑟𝑟[𝑎][𝑙] and 𝑒𝑟𝑟[𝑎][𝑟]. The func-
tion 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑒𝑟𝑟[𝑎][𝑙], 𝑒𝑟𝑟[𝑎][𝑟]) returns either 𝑙[𝑎] or 𝑟[𝑎], for which 
the correspondent error is minimum. The algorithm iterates until 
𝚂𝚝𝚘𝚙𝚙𝚒𝚗𝚐𝙲𝚛𝚒𝚝𝚎𝚛𝚒𝚘𝚗, returning the optimal configuration 𝛼.
A.3. Evaluation
In this Section, we assess the quality of the approach, evaluating it 
on two case studies for which start timestamps are present in the event 
Table A.8
Start timestamp estimator results for each case study and method. The col-
umn ‘‘MAE (min)’’ indicates the Mean Absolute Error (in min) between the 
estimated and the actual timestamps. The column ‘‘Comp. Time (min)’’ refers 
to the computational time. Best results are highlighted in bold.
 Case study Method MAE (min) Comp. Time (min) 
 P2P Our 𝟏𝟖𝟒.𝟐𝟒 𝟐.𝟎𝟑  
 [31] 316.14 8.18  
 MP Our 𝟐𝟏𝟖.𝟔𝟒 𝟏.𝟑𝟗  
 [31] 374.74 8.54  
logs. In particular, we removed the start events in the event-logs, and 
we used our technique to generate them. The evaluation is based on 
comparing the actual ones with those obtained using our technique.
We used Prosimos [75] as a simulator engine, integrating it into 
our implementation. The method has been developed in Python and is 
available in an online repository.1
The evaluation has been conducted on two distinct case studies 
with available event logs: a synthetic purchasing example process (P2P) 
and a manufacturing production process (MP). The event logs and 
their correspondent models are retrieved from the Prosimos GitHub 
repository.2
We compared the starting timestamps obtained by our framework 
with the actual ones computing the Mean Absolute Errors (MAE) in 
time units between all the events. To mitigate the stochasticity inherent 
1 https://github.com/Franc3sc4/StartTimestampEstimator.
2 https://github.com/AutomatedProcessImprovement/Prosimos.
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
16 

===== PAGE 17 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
Algorithm 1 Start Timestamp Estimator
Require: : event log; : simulator model
for 𝑎 ∈  do
 𝑙[𝑎] ← 0
 𝛼[𝑎] ← 𝑙[𝑎]
end for
𝑠𝑖𝑚 ← simulate(, , 𝛼)
for 𝑎 ∈  do
 𝑒𝑟𝑟[𝑎][𝑙] ← 𝜖𝑎(, 𝑠𝑖𝑚)
end for
for 𝑎 ∈  do
 𝑟[𝑎] ← 1
 𝛼[𝑎] ← 𝑟[𝑎]
end for
𝑠𝑖𝑚 ← simulate(, , 𝛼)
for 𝑎 ∈  do
 𝑒𝑟𝑟[𝑎][𝑟] ← 𝜖𝑎(, 𝑠𝑖𝑚)
end for
while StoppingCriterion do
 for 𝑎 ∈  do
 𝛼[𝑎] ← (𝑙[𝑎] + 𝑟[𝑎])∕2
 end for
 𝑠𝑖𝑚 ← simulate(, , 𝛼)
 for 𝑎 ∈  do
 𝛼 ← 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑒𝑟𝑟[𝑎][𝑙], 𝑒𝑟𝑟[𝑎][𝑟])
 if 𝛼 = 𝑙[𝑎] then
 𝑟[𝑎] ← 𝛼[𝑎]
 𝑒𝑟𝑟[𝑎][𝑟] ← 𝜖𝑎(, 𝑠𝑖𝑚)
 else
 𝑙[𝑎] ← 𝛼[𝑎]
 𝑒𝑟𝑟[𝑎][𝑙] ← 𝜖𝑎(, 𝑠𝑖𝑚)
 end if
 end for
end while
return 𝛼
in simulations, we ran the experiments 30 times and averaged the 
results. Table  A.8 reports the outcomes obtained using our approach 
comparing them with those obtained by Fracca et al. [31].
In addition to MAE, we also evaluated the computational time. 
Both methodologies were executed on the same machine to ensure a 
fair comparison, showing that our methodology yields better results 
and significantly shorter computing time. Specifically, we used an 
equipment with an AMD Ryzen 7 PRO 3700U w/ Radeon Vega Mobile 
Gfx 2.30 GHz and 16 GB RAM.
In the P2P case study, our method achieved a 41.72% reduction 
in MAE and a 75.18% decrease in computational time. Similarly, MP 
reveals a decrease in MAE of 41.66% and an improvement in com-
putational time of 83.72%. These results suggest the consistency and 
efficiency of our method. Note that the MAE magnitudes are significant 
for this kind of process which presents long waiting and execution 
times.
A.4. Discussion
In this Appendix, we described and showed the efficacy of our 
proposal technique for repairing missing starting event timestamps. 
The evaluation indicates promising results, showing that our approach 
outperforms the previous method proposed by Fracca et al. [31]. A key 
distinction of our method lies in the optimization function we employ, 
which is tailored to specific activities (see Eq.  (A.3)). Also, unlike the 
approach by Fracca et al. [31], where activities alpha are changed 
one at a time, our method changes them in parallel. This permits 
increasing computational time, and also removing dependencies on 
previous optimized activities alpha, resulting in faster and more robust 
solutions. Finally, our method improves the research of alphas by not 
limiting the search around a starting point depending on a granularity 
parameter, as done in [31]. In fact, we halve the interval [0, 1] during 
the search process, leading to better local optima.
The efficacy and accuracy of our approach suggest its potential 
usability for enriching event logs with missing timestamps. This issue is 
particularly common in event data collected by Healthcare Information 
Systems. In this paper, we used this method to address this challenge, 
showing its application in a real life case study discussed in Section 5.
References
[1] World Health Organization. Ageing and health. 2024, [Accessed: 4 April 2025]
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/ageing-and-health.
[2] World Bank. Societal aging. 2024, URL https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
pensions/brief/societal-aging [Accessed: 4 April 2025].
[3] Dumas M, La Rosa M, Mendling J, Reijers HA. Fundamentals of business process 
management. second ed.. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated; 2018, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-56509-4.
[4] Laguna M, Marklund J. Business process modeling, simulation and design. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall; 2004.
[5] Martin N, Depaire B, Caris A. The use of process mining in business process 
simulation model construction. Bus Inf Syst Eng 2016;58:73–87. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s12599-015-0410-4.
[6] van der Aalst W. Process mining: Data science in action. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg; 2016, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4_1.
[7] Lenz R, Reichert M. IT support for healthcare processes - premises, challenges, 
perspectives. Data Knowl Eng 2007;61(1):39–58. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.
DATAK.2006.04.007.
[8] de Leoni M. Foundations of process enhancement. In: van der Aalst WMP, 
Carmona J, editors. Process mining handbook. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing; 2022, p. 243–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-08848-3_8.
[9] Burattin A, Sperduti A, Veluscek M. Business models enhancement through 
discovery of roles. In: 2013 IEEE symposium on computational intelligence and 
data mining. CIDM, 2013, p. 103–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CIDM.2013.
6597224.
[10] Camargo M, Dumas M, González-Rojas O. Automated discovery of business 
process simulation models from event logs. Decis Support Syst 2020;134:113284. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2020.113284.
[11] de Leoni M, Vinci F, Leemans SJJ, Mannhardt F. Investigating the influence of 
data-aware process states on activity probabilities in simulation models: Does 
accuracy improve? In: Di Francescomarino C, Burattin A, Janiesch C, Sadiq S, 
editors. Business process management. Springer Nature Switzerland; 2023, p. 
129–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-41620-0_8.
[12] van der Aalst WMP. Object-centric process mining: Dealing with divergence 
and convergence in event data. In: Ölveczky PC, Salaün G, editors. Software 
engineering and formal methods - 17th international conference, SEFM 2019, 
oslo, Norway, September 18-20, 2019, proceedings. Lecture notes in computer 
science, vol. 11724, Springer; 2019, p. 3–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-30446-1_1.
[13] Knopp B, Pourbafrani M, van der Aalst WMP. Discovering object-centric process 
simulation models. In: 5th international conference on process mining, ICPM 
2023, rome, Italy, October 23-27, 2023. IEEE; 2023, p. 81–8. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/ICPM60904.2023.10271944.
[14] Breitmayer M, Arnold L, Reichert M. Simulating event logs from object lifecycle 
processes (short paper). In: Böhm S, Lübke D, editors. Proceedings of the 16th 
ZEUS workshop, ulm, Germany, February 29-March 1, 2024. CEUR workshop 
proceedings, vol. 3673, CEUR-WS.org; 2024, p. 14–21.
[15] Munoz-Gama J, Martin N, Fernandez-Llatas C, Johnson OA, Sepúlveda M, 
Helm E, Galvez-Yanjari V, Rojas E, Martinez-Millana A, Aloini D, Amantea IA, 
Andrews R, Arias M, Beerepoot I, Benevento E, Burattin A, Capurro D, Car-
mona J, Comuzzi M, Dalmas B, de la Fuente R, Di Francescomarino C, Di 
Ciccio C, Gatta R, Ghidini C, Gonzalez-Lopez F, Ibanez-Sanchez G, Klasky HB, 
Prima Kurniati A, Lu X, Mannhardt F, Mans R, Marcos M, Medeiros de 
Carvalho R, Pegoraro M, Poon SK, Pufahl L, Reijers HA, Remy S, Rinderle-Ma S, 
Sacchi L, Seoane F, Song M, Stefanini A, Sulis E, ter Hofstede AH, Toussaint PJ, 
Traver V, Valero-Ramon Z, van de Weerd I, van der Aalst WM, Vanwersch R, 
Weske M, Wynn MT, Zerbato F. Process mining for healthcare: Characteristics 
and challenges. J Biomed Inform 2022;127:103994. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jbi.2022.103994.
[16] Guastalla A, Sulis E, Aringhieri R, Branchi S, Di Francescomarino C, Ghidini C. 
Workshift scheduling using optimization and process mining techniques: An 
application in healthcare. In: 2022 winter simulation conference. WSC, 2022, 
p. 1116–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WSC57314.2022.10015405.
[17] van Hulzen G, Martin N, Depaire B, Souverijns G. Supporting capacity man-
agement decisions in healthcare using data-driven process simulation. J Biomed 
Inform 2022;129:104060. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2022.104060.
[18] Halawa F, Chalil Madathil S, Khasawneh MT. Integrated framework of pro-
cess mining and simulation–optimization for pod structured clinical layout 
design. Expert Syst Appl 2021;185:115696. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.
2021.115696.
[19] Tamburis O, Esposito C. Process mining as support to simulation modeling: 
A hospital-based case study. Simul Model Pr Theory 2020;104:102149. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.simpat.2020.102149.
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
17 

===== PAGE 18 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
[20] Antunes BBP, Manresa A, Bastos LSL, Marchesi JF, Hamacher S. A solution 
framework based on process mining, optimization, and discrete-event simulation 
to improve queue performance in an emergency department. In: Di Francesco-
marino C, Dijkman R, Zdun U, editors. Business process management workshops. 
Springer International Publishing; 2019, p. 583–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-37453-2_47.
[21] Johnson OA, Ba Dhafari T, Kurniati A, Fox F, Rojas E. The ClearPath method 
for care pathway process mining and simulation. In: Daniel F, Sheng QZ, Mota-
hari H, editors. Business process management workshops. Springer International 
Publishing; 2019, p. 239–50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-11641-5_19.
[22] Kovalchuk SV, Funkner AA, Metsker OG, Yakovlev AN. Simulation of patient flow 
in multiple healthcare units using process and data mining techniques for model 
identification. J Biomed Inform 2018;82:128–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.
2018.05.004.
[23] Abohamad W, Ramy A, Arisha A. A hybrid process-mining approach for simula-
tion modeling. In: 2017 winter simulation conference. WSC, 2017, p. 1527–38. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WSC.2017.8247894.
[24] Mans R, Reijers H, Wismeijer D, van Genuchten M. A process-oriented methodol-
ogy for evaluating the impact of IT: A proposal and an application in healthcare. 
Inf Syst 2013;38(8):1097–115. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2013.06.005.
[25] Ahmed MA, Alkhamis TM. Simulation optimization for an emergency department 
healthcare unit in Kuwait. European J Oper Res 2009;198(3):936–42. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2008.10.025.
[26] Chapela-Campa D, Benchekroun I, Baron O, Dumas M, Krass D, Senderovich A. 
A framework for measuring the quality of business process simulation models. 
Inf Syst 2025;127:102447. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2024.102447.
[27] Augusto A, Deitz T, Faux N, Manski-Nankervis J-A, Capurro D. Process mining-
driven analysis of COVID-19’s impact on vaccination patterns. J Biomed Inform 
2022;130:104081. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2022.104081.
[28] Benevento E, Aloini D, van der Aalst WM. How can interactive process discovery 
address data quality issues in real business settings? Evidence from a case study 
in healthcare. J Biomed Inform 2022;130:104083. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbi.2022.104083.
[29] Vathy-Fogarassy Á, Vassányi I, Kósa I. Multi-level process mining methodology 
for exploring disease-specific care processes. J Biomed Inform 2022;125:103979. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2021.103979.
[30] Dixit PM, Suriadi S, Andrews R, Wynn MT, ter Hofstede AHM, Buijs JCAM, 
van der Aalst WMP. Detection and interactive repair of event ordering imper-
fection in process logs. In: Krogstie J, Reijers HA, editors. Advanced information 
systems engineering. Springer International Publishing; 2018, p. 274–90. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91563-0_17.
[31] Fracca C, de Leoni M, Asnicar F, Turco A. Estimating activity start timestamps 
in the presence of waiting times via process simulation. In: Franch X, Poels G, 
Gailly F, Snoeck M, editors. Advanced information systems engineering. Springer 
International Publishing; 2022, p. 287–303. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
031-07472-1_17.
[32] Leemans SJJ, Syring AF, van der Aalst WMP. Earth movers’ stochastic confor-
mance checking. In: Hildebrandt T, van Dongen BF, Röglinger M, Mendling J, 
editors. Business process management forum. Springer International Publishing; 
2019, p. 127–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-26643-1_8.
[33] Berti A, van Zelst S, Schuster D. PM4Py: A process mining library for python. 
Softw Impacts 2023;17:100556. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.simpa.2023.100556.
[34] van der Aalst W. THE application of petri nets to workflow manage-
ment. J Circuits Syst Comput 1998;08(01):21–66. http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/
S0218126698000043.
[35] Favre C, Fahland D, Völzer H. The relationship between workflow graphs and 
free-choice workflow nets. Inf Syst 2015;47:197–219. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.is.2013.12.004.
[36] Stefanini A, Aloini D, Benevento E, Dulmin R, Mininno V. Performance 
analysis in emergency departments: a data-driven approach. Meas Bus Excel 
2018;22(2):130–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/MBE-07-2017-0040.
[37] Leemans SJJ, Fahland D, van der Aalst WMP. Discovering block-structured 
process models from event logs - a constructive approach. In: Colom J-M, Desel J, 
editors. Application and theory of Petri nets and concurrency. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2013, p. 311–29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-38697-8_17.
[38] Camargo M, Dumas M, González-Rojas O. Discovering generative models 
from event logs: data-driven simulation vs deep learning. PeerJ Comput Sci 
2021;7:e577. http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/PEERJ-CS.577.
[39] Combi C, Keravnou-Papailiou E, Shahar Y. Temporal information systems in 
medicine, first ed.. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated; 2010.
[40] Lanz A, Reichert M, Weber B. Process time patterns: A formal foundation. Inf 
Syst 2016;57:38–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.IS.2015.10.002.
[41] Chapela-Campa D, Dumas M. Enhancing business process simulation models with 
extraneous activity delays. Inf Syst 2024;122:102346. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
J.IS.2024.102346.
[42] Barba I, Jiménez-Ramírez A, Reichert M, Valle CD, Weber B. Flexible runtime 
support of business processes under rolling planning horizons. Expert Syst Appl 
2021;177:114857. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.ESWA.2021.114857.
[43] Rovani M, Maggi FM, de Leoni M, van der Aalst WMP. Declarative process 
mining in healthcare. Expert Syst Appl 2015;42(23):9236–51. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/J.ESWA.2015.07.040.
[44] Shahar Y. The elicitation, representation, application, and automated discovery 
of time-oriented declarative clinical knowledge. In: Lenz R, Miksch S, Peleg M, 
Reichert M, no DR, ten Teije A, editors. Process support and knowledge represen-
tation in health care - BPM 2012 joint workshop, proHealth 2012/KR4HC 2012, 
tallinn, estonia, September 3, 2012, revised selected papers. Lecture notes in 
computer science, 7738, Springer; 2012, p. 1–29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-36438-9_1.
[45] Mulyar N, Pesic M, van der Aalst WMP, Peleg M. Declarative and procedural 
approaches for modelling clinical guidelines: Addressing flexibility issues. In: 
ter Hofstede AHM, Benatallah B, Paik H, editors. Business process management 
workshops, BPM 2007 international workshops, BPI, BPD, CBP, proHealth, 
refMod, semantics4ws, brisbane, Australia, September 24, 2007, revised selected 
papers. Lecture notes in computer science, 4928, Springer; 2007, p. 335–46. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78238-4_35.
[46] Di Ciccio C, Bernardi ML, Cimitile M, Maggi FM. Generating event logs through 
the simulation of declare models. In: Barjis J, Pergl R, Babkin E, editors. 
Enterprise and organizational modeling and simulation - 11th international 
workshop, EOMAS 2015, held at cAiSE 2015, stockholm, Sweden, June 8-9, 
2015, selected papers. Lecture notes in business information processing, 231, 
Springer; 2015, p. 20–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24626-0_2.
[47] Schönig S, Di Ciccio C, Maggi FM, Mendling J. Discovery of multi-perspective 
declarative process models. In: Sheng QZ, Stroulia E, Tata S, Bhiri S, editors. 
Service-oriented computing - 14th international conference, ICSOC 2016, banff, 
AB, Canada, October 10-13, 2016, proceedings. Lecture notes in computer 
science, 9936, Springer; 2016, p. 87–103. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
46295-0_6.
[48] Vinci F, Park G, van der Aalst WMP, de Leoni M. Online discovery of simula-
tion models for evolving business processes. In: Senderovich A, Cabanillas C, 
Vanderfeesten I, Reijers HA, editors. Business process management - 23rd 
international conference, BPM 2025, seville, Spain, August 31 - September 5, 
2025, proceedings. Lecture notes in computer science, 16044, Springer; 2025, p. 
451–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-032-02867-9_27.
[49] De Roock E, Martin N. Process mining in healthcare – an updated perspective 
on the state of the art. J Biomed Inform 2022;127:103995. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.jbi.2022.103995.
[50] Martin N, Wittig N, Munoz-Gama J. Using process mining in healthcare. In: 
van der Aalst WMP, Carmona J, editors. Process mining handbook. Springer 
International Publishing; 2022, p. 416–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
08848-3_14.
[51] Gatta R, Orini S, Vallati M. Process mining in healthcare: Challenges and promis-
ing directions. In: Chen T, Carter J, Mahmud M, Khuman AS, editors. Artificial 
intelligence in healthcare: recent applications and developments. Springer Nature 
Singapore; 2022, p. 47–61. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-5272-2_2.
[52] Guzzo A, Rullo A, Vocaturo E. Process mining applications in the health-
care domain: A comprehensive review. WIREs Data Min Knowl Discov 
2022;12(2):e1442. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/widm.1442.
[53] Martin N, De Weerdt J, Fernández-Llatas C, Gal A, Gatta R, nez GI, Johnson O, 
Mannhardt F, Marco-Ruiz L, Mertens S, Munoz-Gama J, Seoane F, Vanthienen J, 
Wynn MT, Boilève DB, Bergs J, Joosten-Melis M, Schretlen S, Van Acker B. 
Recommendations for enhancing the usability and understandability of process 
mining in healthcare. Artif Intell Med 2020;109:101962. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.artmed.2020.101962.
[54] Mans RS, van der Aalst WMP, Vanwersch RJB, Moleman AJ. Process mining 
in healthcare: Data challenges when answering frequently posed questions. In: 
Lenz R, Miksch S, Peleg M, Reichert M, Riaño D, ten Teije A, editors. Process 
support and knowledge representation in health care. Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 
2013, p. 140–53. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-36438-9_10.
[55] Mans RS, Schonenberg MH, Song M, van der Aalst WMP, Bakker PJM. Applica-
tion of process mining in healthcare – a case study in a dutch hospital. In: Fred A, 
Filipe J, Gamboa H, editors. Biomedical engineering systems and technologies. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2009, p. 425–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
540-92219-3_32.
[56] Leemans SJ, Partington A, Karnon J, Wynn MT. Process mining for health-
care decision analytics with micro-costing estimations. Artif Intell Med 
2023;135:102473. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2022.102473.
[57] Gonzalez-Lopez F, Martin N, de la Fuente R, Galvez-Yanjari V, Guzmán J, Kat-
tan E, Sepúlveda M, Munoz-Gama J. ProDeM: A process-oriented delphi method 
for systematic asynchronous and consensual surgical process modelling. Artif 
Intell Med 2023;135:102426. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2022.102426.
[58] Rabbi F, Banik D, Hossain NUI, Sokolov A. Using process mining algorithms for 
process improvement in healthcare. Heal Anal 2024;5:100305. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.health.2024.100305.
[59] Combi C, Amico B, Bellazzi R, Holzinger A, Moore JH, Zitnik M, Holmes JH. 
A manifesto on explainability for artificial intelligence in medicine. Artif Intell 
Med 2022;133:102423. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2022.102423.
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
18 

===== PAGE 19 / 19 =====

F. Vinci et al.
[60] Li K, Marsic I, Sarcevic A, Yang S, Sullivan TM, Tempel PE, Milestone ZP, 
O’Connell KJ, Burd RS. Discovering interpretable medical process models: A 
case study in trauma resuscitation. J Biomed Inform 2023;140:104344. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2023.104344.
[61] Benevento E, Dixit PM, Sani MF, Aloini D, van der Aalst WMP. Evaluating the 
effectiveness of interactive process discovery in healthcare: A case study. In: 
Di Francescomarino C, Dijkman R, Zdun U, editors. Business process management 
workshops. Springer International Publishing; 2019, p. 508–19. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-37453-2_41.
[62] Andrews R, Goel K, Corry P, Burdett R, Wynn MT, Callow D. Process data 
analytics for hospital case-mix planning. J Biomed Inform 2022;129:104056. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2022.104056.
[63] Mazhar TI, Tariq A, Leemans SJJ, Goel K, Wynn MT, Staib A. Stochastic-aware 
comparative process mining in healthcare. In: Di Francescomarino C, Burattin A, 
Janiesch C, Sadiq S, editors. Business process management. Springer Nature 
Switzerland; 2023, p. 341–58. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-41620-0_20.
[64] Bakhshi A, Hassannayebi E, Sadeghi AH. Optimizing sepsis care through heuris-
tics methods in process mining: A trajectory analysis. Heal Anal 2023;3:100187. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.health.2023.100187.
[65] Vanbrabant L, Martin N, Ramaekers K, Braekers K. Quality of input data in 
emergency department simulations: Framework and assessment techniques. Simul 
Model Pr Theory 2019;91:83–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.simpat.2018.12.
002.
[66] Bose RJC, Mans RS, van der Aalst WM. Wanna improve process mining 
results? In: 2013 IEEE symposium on computational intelligence and data mining. 
CIDM, 2013, p. 127–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CIDM.2013.6597227.
[67] Suriadi S, Andrews R, ter Hofstede A, Wynn M. Event log imperfection patterns 
for process mining: Towards a systematic approach to cleaning event logs. Inf 
Syst 2017;64:132–50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2016.07.011.
[68] Leonardi G, Montani S, Striani M. Explainable process trace classification: An 
application to stroke. J Biomed Inform 2022;126:103981. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.jbi.2021.103981.
[69] van Hulzen G, Martin N, Depaire B. The need for interactive data-driven process 
simulation in healthcare: A case study. In: Leemans S, Leopold H, editors. 
Process mining workshops. Springer International Publishing; 2021, p. 317–29. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-72693-5_24.
[70] Martin N, Martinez-Millana A, Valdivieso B, Fernández-Llatas C. Interactive data 
cleaning for process mining: A case study of an outpatient clinic’s appointment 
system. In: Di Francescomarino C, Dijkman R, Zdun U, editors. Business process 
management workshops. Springer International Publishing; 2019, p. 532–44. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37453-2_43.
[71] Fischer DA, Goel K, Andrews R, van Dun CGJ, Wynn MT, Röglinger M. Enhanc-
ing event log quality: Detecting and quantifying timestamp imperfections. In: 
Fahland D, Ghidini C, Becker J, Dumas M, editors. Business process management. 
Springer International Publishing; 2020, p. 309–26. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-58666-9_18.
[72] Rozinat A, Mans R, Song M, van der Aalst W. Discovering simulation models. 
Inf Syst 2009;34(3):305–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2008.09.002.
[73] Padella A, Vinci F, de Leoni M. An experimental comparison of alternative 
techniques for event-log augmentation. 2025, arXiv:2511.01896.
[74] Ramdas A, Trillos NG, Cuturi M. On wasserstein two-sample testing and related 
families of nonparametric tests. Entropy 2017;19(2). http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
e19020047.
[75] López-Pintado O, Halenok I, Dumas M. Prosimos: Discovering and simulating 
business processes with differentiated resources. In: Sales TP, Proper HA, 
Guizzardi G, Montali M, Maggi FM, Fonseca CM, editors. Enterprise design, oper-
ations, and computing. EDOC 2022 workshops. Springer International Publishing; 
2023, p. 346–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-26886-1_23.
Artiϧcial Intelligence In Medicine 176 (2026) 103391 
19 