

===== PAGE 1 / 8 =====

arXiv:2408.13666v1  [cs.SE]  24 Aug 2024
Discovery and Simulation of Data-Aware Business
Processes
Orlenys L´ opez-Pintado
University of T artu
Tartu, Estonia
orlenyslp@ut.ee
Serhii Murashko
University of T artu
Tartu, Estonia
serhii.murashko@ut.ee
Marlon Dumas
University of T artu
Tartu, Estonia
marlon.dumas@ut.ee
Abstract—Simulation is a common approach to predict the
effect of business process changes on quantitative perform ance.
The starting point of Business Process Simulation (BPS) is a
process model enriched with simulation parameters. To cope
with the typically large parameter spaces of BPS models, sev eral
methods have been proposed to automatically discover BPS
models from event logs. Virtually all these approaches negl ect the
data perspective of business processes. Y et, the data attri butes
manipulated by a business process often determine which ac-
tivities are performed, how many times, and when. This paper
addresses this gap by introducing a data-aware BPS modeling
approach and a method to discover data-aware BPS models from
event logs. The BPS modeling approach supports three types
of data attributes (global, case-level, and event-level) a s well
as deterministic and stochastic attribute update rules and data-
aware branching conditions. An empirical evaluation shows that
the proposed method accurately discovers the type of each da ta
attribute and its associated update rules, and that the resu lting
BPS models more closely replicate the process execution con trol
ﬂow relative to data-unaware BPS models.
Index Terms—Business process simulation, process mining
I. I NTRODUCTION
Business Process Simulation (BPS) is a technique to predict
how one or more changes to a process will affect its perfor-
mance [1]. It allows analysts to answer “what-if” questions
such as ( S1) how would a shift in consumer preferences from
one product category to another affect the performance of
an order-to-cash process; or ( S2) what would be the effect
of changes in the distribution of loan amounts on the cycle
time of a loan origination process? The starting point of BPS
is a process model enriched with simulation parameters (a
BPS model). A simulation engine interprets the BPS model,
yielding a simulated event log and performance metrics.
BPS models consist of numerous elements and parameters
that need to be carefully tuned to reﬂect the behavior of
the modeled business process. Several studies [1]–[4] have
proposed data-driven simulation methods, which automatic ally
discover BPS models from event logs. These methods focus on
discovering BPS models along the control ﬂow, organization al,
and temporal perspectives. While some existing methods dis -
cover conditions on data attributes or ﬁring rules based on
data variables, none is able to discover how data attributes
are initialized and updated during the execution of cases in a
Work funded by European Research Council (PIX project) and E stonian
Ministry of Education & Research via Estonian Centre of Exce llence in AI.
business process. Hence, the resulting BPS models cannot be
used to answer what-if questions in the style of ( S1) and ( S2).
This paper addresses the outlined limitations by propos-
ing (1) a data-aware business process simulation approach
supporting different types of data attributes alongside da ta
initialization (a.k.a., generation) and update rules and b ranch-
ing conditions based on data attributes and (2) a method
to discover such data-aware simulation model from event
logs.1 The paper presents an empirical evaluation showing that
the proposed method can accurately classify data attribute s
and discover their associated update rules. Besides, it sho ws
that data-aware simulation models with branching conditio ns
discovered from event logs replicate process control ﬂow mo re
accurately than (or comparable to) data-unaware models.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
discusses related work. Section III describes and formaliz es
the data-aware simulation approach. Section IV proposes th e
corresponding method to discover the simulation models.
Section V empirically evaluates the proposal, and Section V I
concludes and sketches future work.
II. R ELATED WORK
Rozinat et al. [1] propose a method to discover a BPS model
from an event log. The method ﬁrst discovers a control-ﬂow
model using automated process discovery. It then enhances
it with activity durations and roles. Roles are discovered
using clustering so that resources that usually perform the
same activities are grouped in one role. Finally, the model i s
enhanced with branching conditions discovered via decisio n
tree learning. However, this approach does not capture how
the values of the data attributes used in the conditions are
initialized and updated. The present paper ﬁlls this gap. Al so,
the present paper differs from [1] in that it combines branch ing
conditions with branching probabilities so that probabili ties are
used when the accuracy of the conditions is low.
Camargo et al. [2] extend the approach of Rozinat et al. in
three ways. First, it lifts the assumption that activity dur ations
always follow a normal distribution. Second, it discovers
1In this paper, “data-driven simulation” refers to simulati on methods based
on BPS models discovered from event logs, whereas “data-awa re simulation
model” refers to a simulation model that incorporates infor mation on how data
items are produced and used, and “data attributes” refers to a mechanism to
capture data in a simulation model.

===== PAGE 2 / 8 =====

branching probabilities instead of branching conditions, thus
ensuring that the resulting model is executable (without ma n-
ually adding data attribute initialization and updating ru les).
Finally, it adds a hyperparameter optimization phase to ﬁne -
tune the parameters used to discover the control-ﬂow model,
the roles, and every other component of the BPS model. The
use of hyperparameter optimization consistently improves the
accuracy of the resulting BPS model relative to the approach
of Rozinat et al. On the other hand, the method of Camargo
et al. does not discover data attributes or conditions.
Estrada-Torres et al. [3] extend the method of Camargo et
al. to capture resource availability calendars and multita sking
behavior, further enhancing the accuracy of the resulting
models.2 Later, L´ opez-Pintado et al. [4] reﬁne the approach
of Estrada-Torres et al. (and by transitivity that of Camarg o
et al. and Rozinat et al. to lift the restrictions that (i) rol es
must be disjoint; (ii) all resources of a role must have the
same calendar; and (iii) an activity can only be associated t o
one role. The authors show that this differentiated resources
approach outperforms the method by Estrada-Torres et al. an d
by transitivity those of Camargo et al. and Rozinat et al.
Accordingly, we use this latter approach as a baseline.
Pourbafrani et al. [5] discover system dynamics simulation
models using process mining, focusing on high-level aggre-
gated behaviors with causal-loop and stock-ﬂow diagrams.
Other recent approaches combine BPMN simulation modeling
with deep learning models to generate timestamped event
sequences [6] and to predict waiting and processing times [7 ],
but without considering data attributes.
De Leoni et al. [8], building upon previous studies [9],
[10], discover stochastic Petri nets extended with a notion of
“process state” based on “variables”. The approach compute s
transition weights through logistic regression based on th ese
states. In contrast, the approach presented in this paper us es
data attributes of different types, update rules, and data- aware
branching conditions to model the data perspective. This
explicit support for data attributes and branching conditi ons
allows users to deﬁne simulation scenarios involving chang es
in data distributions, data updates, and decision logic.
Decision mining techniques [11], [12] identify decision
points within a process and discover data-aware branching
conditions for each path. In contrast, the proposed data-aw are
process simulation model integrates decision conditions i nto
a broader approach, categorizing data attributes and using
deterministic and stochastic update rules.
III. D ATA-AWARE PROCESS SIMULATION MODELS
Our notion of Data-A ware BP Simulation Model (DAS),
formalized in Deﬁnition 1 integrates standard Business Pro cess
Model and Notation (BPMN) elements enhanced with simula-
tion parameters. The BPMN model captures the control-ﬂow
perspective, i.e., the process activities and their relati ons. On
top of that, the simulation parameters target the organizat ional,
temporal, and data dimensions. Although this paper focuses on
2In this paper, we do not handle multitasking as this is an orth ogonal issue.
discovering and representing data components and decision -
making mechanisms, Deﬁnition 1 also introduces the notions
of resource allocation and inter-arrival case schemas requ ired
for modeling the organizational and temporal perspectives as
part of the simulation environment.
Deﬁnition 1: A Data-A ware BP Simulation Model (DAS)
builds upon standard BPMN elements ⟨E, A, G, F⟩ – with
events (E), activities (A), gateways (G), and ﬂow arcs (F) – a nd
enhanced with specialized simulation parameters as follow s:
• RS = ⟨TRMap, ProcTimes, RAvail⟩ is the Resource Al-
location Schema. This schema includes TRMap, mapping
of resources to tasks; ProcTimes, which are functions
modeling the time required for resources to complete as-
signed activities; and RAvail, representing the availabil ity
calendars of resources for activity execution.
• ATAC : P(R+)× Intervals models case creation times
by combining AT , the probability density function for
inter-arrival times, with AC, the calendar in which new
cases can be created.
• Dg = {g1, g2, . . . , gm} is a ﬁnite set of global attributes.
• Dc = {c1, c2, . . . , ck} is a ﬁnite set of case attributes.
• De = {e1, e2, . . . , el} is a ﬁnite set of event attributes.
• U R = {ur1, ur2, . . . , urn} is a set of update rules uri :
(Dg ∪ Dc ∪ De) × S → S . Each uri ∈ U R consists
of a combination of functions and conditional logic to
dynamically modify the current data state ( s ∈ S ) of any
global, case, or event attributes, resulting in a new data
state in the domain of possible data states S.
• M U R : U R → (A ∪ { Case
Creation}) maps each
update rule ur ∈ U R to the step in the process where
this rule is executed, which may be when the case is
created or when a task is completed.
• BC : G × (SDg × S Dc × S De ) → F × { T rue, F alse} is
a function that, given a gateway and a data state of the
process, assigns a truth value to each ﬂow F , such that
ﬂows f ∈ F s.t., source(f ) ̸= G are assigned a F alse
value, while ﬂows f ∈ F s.t., source(f ) = G may be
F alse or T rue.
• BP : F → [0..1] is a function that assigns a probability
to each ﬂow, such that ﬂows whose source is not a
gateway (unconditional ﬂows in the BPMN terminology)
get a value of 1, while ﬂows whose source is a gateway
(conditional ﬂow) may get a value between zero and one.
In Deﬁnition 1, attributes are partitioned into sets Dg, Dc,
and De based on their scope (local to a process instance vs
global across all cases of a process) and their mutability (s tatic
or dynamic). A global attribute (e.g., available-hospital-beds)
has a shared value across all process cases. They can capture
critical sections, e.g., to prevent new patient admissions when
the hospital reaches its capacity. A case attribute (e.g., reason-
for-admission) may take a different value for each case. A
case attribute is static – its value is determined at the star t of a
case and cannot be updated. An event attribute (e.g., assigned-
doctor or diagnostic-test-results) has a local scope, and it is
dynamic – an update rule may change its value.

===== PAGE 3 / 8 =====

An update rule changes the value of a global or an event
attribute during the execution of a case. For example, when a
patient is assigned a bed, the case attribute available-hospital-
beds is decremented. This behavior may be captured by an
update rule associated with a task “Assign bed”. Similarly, an
update rule associated with a task “Record diagnostic” may
change the value of an event attribute diagnostic-test-results.
An update rule may be used to initialize a case attribute,
e.g., to assign a value to the reason-for-admission attribute.
Conceptually, such update rules are executed when a case is
created. The mapping M U R determines whether an update
rule is ﬁred upon case creation or when a task instance is
completed (e.g., after “Assign bed”).
In Deﬁnition 1, the “data state” refers to the set of “attribu te:
value” pairs (of all the deﬁned attributes in the process mod el)
at a given point in the process simulation. This state is alte red
by executing update rules as the simulation unfolds.
The data state of the process determines which ﬂows may be
taken when the control-ﬂow state of the simulation reaches a
decision gateway. In Deﬁnition 1, this is captured via funct ion
BC (standing for Branching Conditions), which assigns a truth
value to each outgoing ﬂow of a decision gateway based on
the data state. This function is deﬁned at an abstract level, but
concretely, it is a boolean expression over the data attribu tes.
Deﬁnition 1 additionally supports the selection of decisio n
gateway branches based on probabilities. This is captured b y
the function BP (standing for Branching Probabilities), which
assigns a probability to each conditional ﬂow.
The execution semantics at each decision gateway follow a
two-staged approach. First, the branching conditions dete rmine
which ﬂows may be taken. Next, the branching probabilities
are used to determine which one(s) is/are selected among
the ﬂows that may be taken. Speciﬁcally, when a gateway
is reached during a case simulation, the boolean function
associated with each outgoing conditional ﬂow is evaluated ,
thus assigning a value of T rue or F alse to each ﬂow. Flows
are then selected as follows:
• If only one of the ﬂows gets a T rue value, it is selected.
• If multiple ﬂows get a T rue value, the behavior depends
on the type of decision gateway:
– For an exclusive (XOR) gateway, the ﬂows that fulﬁll
the branching probabilities of these T rue ﬂows are
summed, then normalized to a total probability mass
of 1.0, and, ﬁnally, one of the ﬂows is randomly
selected based on these probabilities.
– For an inclusive (OR) gateway, a coin ﬂip is made
for each ﬂow with a T rue value considering its
associated branching probability. If the coin ﬂips lead
to no ﬂow being selected, the default ﬂow is taken.
It may be that multiple ﬂows are selected.
• If no ﬂow gets a T rue value, the default ﬂow is taken,
as per the standard BPMN semantics.
This approach allows us to deﬁne purely stochastic choices
by setting the branching conditions at a gateway to “always
T rue” so that the branching probabilities drive the choice.
Conversely, we can deﬁne a purely data-driven choice by
assigning branching conditions to a gateway and setting its
branching probabilities to 1. Hybrids between these two ex-
tremes are supported, e.g., a gateway where some branches
have branching conditions while others only have probabili ties.
IV. D ISCOVERING DATA-AWARE SIMULATION MODELS
In the following, we describe our approach to discovering
a simulation model (as in Deﬁnition 1) from an event log. An
event log is a set of events. Each event represents the execut ion
of an activity instance within a case of a business process. 3 An
event consists of a case identiﬁer, an activity label, a reso urce
identiﬁer, start and end timestamps, and additional attrib utes
capturing inputs or outputs of the activity instance or attr ibutes
of the case. Given that a case identiﬁer ID is present in an
event log, a trace is the sequence of events with the same ID
as a case identiﬁer, chronologically ordered by start times tamp.
Thus, a trace captures the execution of a case.
The proposed method involves three main steps. (1) Extract-
ing and classifying global ( Dg), event ( De), and case ( Dc)
attributes. (2) Computing the update rules ( U R) that deﬁne
how to modify these attributes throughout the simulation an d
mapping these rules to the respective activities responsib le
for such updates ( M U R). (3) Discovering the branching
conditions ( HBC = BC ∪ BP ) related to the decision
points within the process ﬂow. The remaining components
in Deﬁnition 1, including control ﬂow, organizational, and
temporal dimensions (outside the scope of this paper), were
discovered using the approach in [4].
A. Data Attribute Classiﬁcation
Attributes in an event log are not explicitly labeled as glob al,
event, or case attributes. This metadata is required for sim ula-
tion, as each attribute type has different execution semant ics.
Thus, one of the challenges of discovering a simulation mode l
is identifying each attribute’s type. Separating event att ributes
from global attributes requires an analysis of update patte rns
across traces, as the same sequence of attribute values coul d
result from global or event-level updates, creating ambigu ity
in determining the attribute’s proper classiﬁcation. A sec ond
challenge is that event logs give us the value of attributes a fter
the activity instance completes. However, we also need the
attribute’s value when the activity instance starts to disc over
update rules. Thus, another challenge is to infer such pre-
execution values. Finally, given the pairs of values before and
after the executions of a given activity, a third challenge i s
to infer a rule that captures how the post-execution value is
derived from the pre-execution one.
Conversely to global and event attributes, which are subjec t
to ambiguity, identifying case attributes is straightforw ard
because their values remain constant within each process ca se.
To account for potential data noise, we include a threshold p a-
rameter specifying the ratio of instances where the invaria bility
condition must hold in the discovery. For example, with a
3This type of event log is also known as an activity instance lo g.

===== PAGE 4 / 8 =====

Algorithm 1 Dynamic Attributes Classiﬁcation
1: function CLASSIFY ASATTRIBUTE (L: E VENT LOG, IN ITG: D ATAGENERATOR )
2: LSP ← SPLIT EVENT LOG(L)
3: — Attempting data-attribute as a event attribute —
4: DE ← {} ⊲ Stores data-updates for each pair < activity, attribute >
5: for each CASE-ID cI ∈ LSP do
6: T ← FILTEREVENTS BYCASE ID(LSP , cI)
7: SORTBYTIMESTAMPS (T )
8: FIND DATAVALUES (T , DE , IN ITG)
9: — Attempting data-attribute as a global attribute —
10: DG ← {} ⊲ Stores data-updates for each pair < activity, attribute >
11: SORTBYTIMESTAMPS (LSP )
12: FIND DATAVALUES (LSP , DG, IN ITG)
13: — Selecting best attribute classiﬁcation —
14: U R ← {} Stores update rules for each pair < activity, attribute >
15: for each pair < α : Activity, B: attribute-type > ∈ L do
16: U RG ← FIND UPDATE RULE (DG , α , B) ⊲ U R as Global Attribute
17: U RE ← FIND UPDATE RULE (DE , α , B) ⊲ U R as Event Attribute
18: U R[α ][B] ← MINERROUR(L, U RG, U RE )
19: return U R
Algorithm 2 Splitting Events by Start and End Times
1: function SPLIT EVENT LOG(L: E VENT LOG)
2: LSP ← []
3: for each event e ∈ L do
4: ADD(LSP , <CASE-ID[e], ACTIVITY [e], START-TIME[e]>)
5: ADD(LSP , <CASE-ID[e], ACTIVITY [e], END-TIME [e], A TTRS[e]>)
6: return LSP
threshold of 0.9, we classify an attribute as a case attribut e if its
value is constant in 90% of the cases. The remaining dynamic
attributes will be categorized as global or event attribute s.
Given the inherent ambiguity in classifying dynamic at-
tributes as global or event-level in a log, our approach eval -
uates each attribute as both types to ﬁnd the best ﬁt using
regression analysis. Algorithm 1 outlines the general meth od
for classifying attributes and discovering their update ru les.
Initially, each event is split into two parts based on their
starting and ending times. As shown in Algorithm 2, the
starting part of the event does not include any information
about data attributes, as these values are initially unknow n
and thus estimated in the following steps.
Next, Algorithm 1 estimates the data values at the beginning
of each activity in the log. Those values may vary depend-
ing on whether it is a global or event attribute. Lines 3-8
attempt each attribute as an event attribute, i.e., handled by
each process case independently. To this end, it sorts event s
within each case by their timestamps, resets attribute valu es
to their default (e.g., 0 if numeric) at the beginning of each
case, and updates them based on the most recent completed
activity within the same case. This approach ensures that ev ent
attribute candidates reﬂect each case’s speciﬁc context an d
progression without being inﬂuenced by other cases.
For attempting attributes as global (lines 9-12), Algorith m 1
does not reset values between cases but treats the entire log as
a continuous sequence of events. It globally sorts all event s by
their timestamps, so the value of a global attribute at the st art
of an activity depends on the most recent completed activity in
the entire log. This method captures cumulative changes acr oss
all cases, ensuring that global attributes maintain a conti nuous
and cumulative value throughout the process.
Algorithm 3, invoked in lines 8 and 12 of Algorithm 1,
respectively, under event and global attribute assumption s,
Algorithm 3 Estimating Activity Starting Data V alues
1: function FIND DATAVALUES (LSP : E VLIST, D: D ICT, IN ITG: G ENERATOR )
2: for each data-attribute type B ∈ LSP do
3: β ← IN ITG[B] ⊲ Initializing data-attribute value from its generator
4: A′ ← {} ⊲ Dictionary of < activity : data − value >
5: for each event e ∈ LSP do
6: α ← ACTIVITY[ e]
7: if IS-START[ e] then
8: A′[α ] ← β
9: if IS-END[ e] then
10: β ← ATTRIBUTE-VALUE[ B, e]
11: D[α ][B].APPEND (< A ′[α ], β > )
estimates starting data values for each pair activity-attr ibute
(α, B). Since event logs do not provide initial attribute values,
the algorithm uses a predeﬁned data generator ( IN IT G) to
initialize these values. This generator could assign defau lt
values, such as 0, for numeric attributes or use other speciﬁ ed
functions. As Algorithm 3 iterates over each event, it recor ds
initial values at start events from the previously complete d
activity while keeping the values observed in the log at end
events, thus tracking attribute states required to estimat e the
update rules in the following steps. Back to Algorithm 1,
in line 13, it already retrieved the entire data ﬂow for each
attribute under two possible scenarios, i.e., local ( DE) and
global ( DG). Then, it derives the corresponding update rules
and selects, for each attribute, the classiﬁcation (global /event)
that leads to the minimum error (line 18). Speciﬁcally, it
chooses the classiﬁcation whose associated update rule mos t
closely matches the observed data ﬂow in the input log.
B. Update Rules Extraction
Lines 13-17 of Algorithm 1 extract the update rules can-
didates for each attribute, assuming both global and event
classiﬁcation scenarios. To this end, Algorithm 4 is invoke d
to determine the most suitable update rules. Here, attribut es
from event logs are broadly classiﬁed into categorical and c on-
tinuous (numerical). Categorical attributes represent di screte
values or categories, such as the status of an order (“pendin g,”
“shipped,” “delivered”) or the type of task performed. Cont in-
uous attributes, on the other hand, represent numerical val ues
that can be measured on a continuous scale, such as inventory
levels or costs. For categorical attributes, update rules i nvolve
transitioning between different states, while for continu ous
attributes, they involve mathematical functions that desc ribe
changes in numerical values. Besides, generators are a spec iﬁc
update rule type that produces new values independently of t he
current attribute state, often based on predeﬁned probabil ities
or distributions. Thus, unlike typical update rules, which
consider the attribute’s current value to determine the nex t
value, generators do not consider the current state.
In Algorithm 4, β0 and βn represent the initial and end
state (value) of the data attributes modiﬁed by an activity. For
example, consider an attribute representing inventory lev els.
Linear regression ( U R1) can predict linear relationships from
the initial states, such as increasing inventory linearly w ith
each delivery by training a model with transitions, passing
β0 (initial state) and βn (end state) as input. Decision tree
regression ( U R2) models more complex data patterns by

===== PAGE 5 / 8 =====

Algorithm 4 Update Rules Estimation
1: function FIND UPDATE RULES (D: D ATATRANSITIONS DICT , α , B)
2: if IS-NUMERICAL[ B] then
3: U R1 ← LINEAR REGRESSION (∀ pair < β 0, β n >∈ D[α ][B])
4: U R2 ← DECISION TREE REGRESSION (∀ pair < β 0, β n >∈ D[α ][B])
5: U R3 ← DISTRIBUTION UR(∀ β n − β 0, < β 0, β n >∈ D[α ][B])
6: U R4 ← DISTRIBUTION GEN(∀ β n ∈ D[α ][B])
7: if IS-CATEGORICAL[ B] then
8: U R5 ← MARKOV MATRIX ( ∀ pair < β 0, β n >∈ D[α ][B])
9: U R6 ← PROBABILISTIC GENERATOR ( ∀ β n ∈ D[α ][B])
10: return MINERRORUR(D, U R1, U R2, U R3, U R4, U R5, U R6)
splitting them into segments based on speciﬁc criteria, suc h
as different supplier behaviors, based on β0 to predict βn.
Distribution-based update rules ( U R3) model changes using
the relationship di+1 = di + ∆, where ∆ is drawn from a
probabilistic distribution, capturing the variability in changes
by performing curve ﬁtting on βn − β0. Distribution generators
(U R4) produce values based only on each end state βn,
reﬂecting the overall distribution of attribute values wit hout
considering the initial state. A Markov matrix ( U R5) models
state transitions based on the current state for categorica l
attributes. Probabilistic generators ( U R6) predict the next state
based on observed frequencies independent of the current
value. These methods are well-established in predictive mo d-
eling and process mining for their efﬁcacy in capturing line ar
and complex patterns [13].
We evaluate these methods by comparing prediction errors
for each activity-attribute pair under global and event-le vel
assumptions, selecting the one with the minimum error. Only
activities for which update rules are discovered appear in t he
mapping M U R of the discovered model (cf., Deﬁnition 1).
C. Branching Conditions Extraction
To estimate branching conditions at decision points within
the process model, our approach captures the data states bef ore
and after decision points, such as XOR and OR split gateways,
and analyzes these data states to determine the conditions
inﬂuencing the ﬂow paths. To this end, it uses a replayer to
simulate the process execution based on an event log L over
a process model P written in the BPMN notation.
The approach initializes an empty state matrix S. For each
process case T in the event log L, the initial data state is
set up from the ﬁrst recorded data attribute. The replayer
simulates the process execution, tracking changes in data
attributes across each event. At decision points, it captur es
the data states before and after traversing gateways, stori ng
and associating them with the outgoing ﬂows in S.
Then, the approach builds a decision tree using state matrix
S. One decision tree is built for each conditional ﬂow F .
Every event in the log leading to the gateway G, which is the
source of F , is used in the training sample. The features of this
training sample are the attribute states after each (incomi ng)
event completion. The label is T rue if the ﬂow was traversed
right after this state, and it is F alse otherwise. From the
decision tree, we extract a branching condition for that ﬂow
(cf., BC in Deﬁnition 1). In addition to assigning branching
conditions, the approach also assigns branching probabili ties
(cf., BC in Deﬁnition 1) to each conditional ﬂow based on
the traversal frequencies of each gateway (normalized so th at
these values are between zero and one).
V. I MPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
The approach was implemented in the S IMOD tool for auto-
mated discovery of simulation models from event logs [2] 4 and
the P ROSIMOS simulation engine [4], [14] 5 to support data-
aware simulation. Using these extended versions of S IMOD
and P ROSIMOS , we conducted an empirical evaluation to
address the following questions: EQ1 How accurately are
global, event, and case attributes classiﬁed when discover ed
from event logs? EQ2 How accurately are the update rules
identiﬁed and mapped to activities when discovered from eve nt
logs? and EQ3 How do branching conditions discovered from
event logs and embedded in the data-aware simulation perfor m
relative to non-data-aware (probabilistic) simulation mo dels?
A. Datasets and Experimental Setup
We generated 150 synthetic event logs and used three
real-life logs to evaluate accuracy in attribute discovery and
control ﬂow replication. The main experimental setup is bri eﬂy
outlined below; detailed procedures are available in the su p-
plementary material at https://zenodo.org/records/1334 1463.
To answer the ﬁrst two experimental questions EQ1 and
EQ2, a synthetic log was generated using the Apromore
platform,6 starting from a loan application process simulation
model that already incorporated control ﬂow, organization al,
and temporal perspectives. We then injected various data
attributes into the log generated from this model to assess
whether our technique could accurately discover them. We
used various data generation functions commonly found in
real-life phenomena to generate data attributes (see suppl e-
mentary material for a detailed explanation).
For numeric (continuous) data patterns, we employed 10
functions: linear trend ( L T), exponential growth ( EG), lognor-
mal data ( LN), autoregressive sequences ( AR1), conditional
exponential growth ( CE), periodic (sinusoidal) oscillations
(SS), switching regression ( SR), piecewise linear trends ( PL),
uniform distribution (UD), and normal distribution ( ND). Each
function was applied to generate attributes under four diff erent
data patterns: event attributes modiﬁed by one (randomly se -
lected) activity ( SE), event attributes modiﬁed by all activities
(ME), global attributes modiﬁed by one (randomly selected)
activity ( SG), and global attributes modiﬁed by all activities
(MG). To emulate real scenarios, each generated sequence was
perturbed with different levels of Gaussian noise. This set up
resulted in 40 distinct datasets.
For categorical (discrete) data, the evaluation included
10 patterns modeling state transitions and random state se-
quences: high self-transition ( HST), uniform exclusive transi-
tions ( UET), uniform inclusive transitions ( UIT), rare state
transition ( RST), one-state dominating transitions ( SDT),
cyclic transitions ( CT), and random states with two equal
4https://github.com/AutomatedProcessImprovement/Simod
5https://github.com/AutomatedProcessImprovement/Prosimos
6https://apromore.com

===== PAGE 6 / 8 =====

probabilities ( E2P), two non-equal probabilities ( N2P), ﬁve
equal probabilities ( E5P), and ﬁve non-equal probabilities
(N5P). For example, high self-transition probability and rare
transitions to one speciﬁc state simulated different Marko v
chains, while random state functions generated sequences
of categorical states based on speciﬁed probabilities. The se
patterns were applied under the same four data patterns as
the numeric functions ( SE, ME, SG, MG), resulting in 40
additional data patterns.
For case attributes, which are more straightforward to
discover, we used 10 data patterns. These included ﬁxed
values and attributes generated from exponential, normal, and
uniform distributions. We also included 6 categorical data
patterns with 2, 5, or 10 states, each conﬁgured with equal
and non-equal increasing probabilities.
We focused on control ﬂow to assess EQ3, as branching
conditions impact the order in which activities are execute d.
We used a data-unaware simulation model (NDAS) with
probabilistic gateway decisions [4] as a baseline to compar e
with our data-aware model (DAS). The BPMN model included
three sequential blocks, each with an activity, a split gate -
way, ﬁve outgoing activities, and a join gateway. We tested
two BPMN variants: inclusive (OR) and exclusive (XOR)
gateways. We allocated 100 full-day resources to avoid non-
data-related waiting times and assigned random distributi on
functions to each activity’s processing times. Both NDAS an d
DAS models used the same components for fair comparison,
differing only in branching decision models. DAS used the
branching conditions from this paper, while NDAS used
branching probabilities from frequency analysis. We gener ated
60 simulated event logs using P ROSIMOS .
We used patterns based on categorical and continuous
attributes to evaluate XOR conditions. Categorical patter ns
included: “equal” (EQ), where all outgoing arcs had conditions
holding with the same probability; “unbalanced” ( UB), in
which only one ﬂow arc had a 100% valid condition; and
“random” (RD), i.e., arcs had conditions enabled with different
probabilities. Continuous patterns followed “normal” ( ND)
and “exponential” ( ED) distributions using the ∈ interval
operator, with varying probabilities. Additionally, we us ed ﬁve
“complex conditions” ( CC1, CC2, CC3, CC4, and CC5)
combining categorical and continuous attributes with arit h-
metic (=, <, ≤ , ∈ ) and logical ( ∧ , ∨ ) operators. Additionally,
each pattern was randomly perturbated, adding 20% noise, i. e.,
data values not ﬁlling any condition. This setup resulted in 20
datasets, each simulated ﬁrst assuming event-based attrib utes
and then case-based attributes, retrieving 40 event logs.
Unlike XOR gateways, OR gateways select multiple con-
current ﬂows based on various conditions being fulﬁlled. To
assess this behavior, we used the same data patterns as for
XOR (EQ, UB, ND, ED, and CC1) but extended them to allow
the activation of multiple arcs. For each pattern, we genera ted
conditions to activate 1, 2, and 5 random outgoing ﬂow arcs.
Additionally, we included an extra case, injecting 20% nois e
where none of the conditions held. This setup resulted in a
total of 20 event logs.
TABLE I: Characteristics of the real-life business process es.
Log Cases Events Activities XOR OR Attributes
Traﬁc 36883 130359 11 8 0 11
Sepsis 1049 15214 16 12 0 27
BPIC19 60740 272507 37 41 0 12
In addition to the 150 synthetic datasets, 7 90 for attribute
and update rules accuracy, and 60 for branching conditions,
we assessed our approach on three real-life logs. The ﬁrst tw o,
Trafﬁc and Sepsis, were also used to evaluate the decision-
mining technique presented in [11]. The road ﬁnes ( Trafﬁc)
log comes from an Italian local police information system
handling trafﬁc ﬁnes. The Sepsis log records patient pathways
with suspected sepsis, a life-threatening infection, over one
year in a hospital. The third real-log, BPIC19,8 comes from a
multinational coatings and paints company in the Netherlan ds,
describing the purchase order handling process for its 60
subsidiaries. From this log, we evaluated all the cases cove ring
over 2.5 months of data from January to March 2018. Table I
gives descriptive statistics of these real-life business p rocesses.
To prevent data leakage and overﬁtting, we split each log
into training and testing sets using a temporal split: the ﬁr st
50% of traces chronologically for training (to discover the
DAS) and the remaining 50% for testing model accuracy.
To assess the accuracy of our approach, we used different
metrics. We used the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) for
numerical attributes to measure how different two distribu tions
are by calculating the cost to transform one into another,
thus ﬁtting for capturing differences in continuous data pa t-
terns. For categorical attributes, we applied the Kolmogor ov-
Smirnov (KS) test, a non-parametric metric that compares
the cumulative distributions of two datasets to determine i f
they differ signiﬁcantly. The KS test is suitable for catego rical
data because it is sensitive to differences in the location a nd
shape of the empirical distribution functions. Finally, to assess
branching conditions, we used the 3-gram metric to compare
the sequences of activities generated by the DAS versus the
NDAS model, i.e., checking how well the DAS replicates the
process control ﬂow [15], [16].
B. Experimental Results Discussion
To answer EQ1, Table II shows the EMD results for the dis-
covered update rules across 40 synthetic continuous datase ts.
It highlights correctly classiﬁed attributes (global or ev ent-
based) in green and misclassiﬁed ones in red. Superscripts
indicate the model type giving the best approximation: L
for linear regression, T for decision tree regression, E for
distribution-based rules, and G for generators. Overall, t he
models led to accurate classiﬁcations for approximately 95 %
of the attributes, showing their effectiveness in correctl y identi-
fying event-based and global modiﬁcations. Linear regress ion
was the best model in about 40% of cases, particularly for
linear trends and some exponential growth scenarios. Decis ion
7Each synthetic event log consisted of 2000 cases, with a mini mum of
20000 events varying based on the data patterns generator.
8https://doi.org/10.4121/uuid:d06aff4b-79f0-45e6-8ec8-e19730c248f1

===== PAGE 7 / 8 =====

TABLE II: Mean EMD results for synthetic numeric update rule s
LT EG LN AR1 CE SS SR PL UD ND
SE 0.16L 0.15L 0.05T 0.04L 0.03T 0.00T 0.15T 0.16L 2.51L 10.42G
ME 0.05L 0.09L 0.05L 0.02T 0.04L 0.12T 0.27T 1.37T 2.35T 7.37G
SG 0.04L 7M L 0.01L 0.00L 8.8K T 0.01L 0.09∆ 0.28∆ 0.19T 5.37T
MG 1.04T 8E34∆ 0.03L 0.02L 3E35∆ 0.23T 1.42∆ 6.81∆ 2.32T 7.85G
TABLE III: Mean KS results for synthetic categorical update rules
HST UET RST UIT SDT CT E2P N2P E5P N5P
SE 0.33/ 0.25/ 0.25/ 0.33/ 0.25/ 0.20F 0.33/ 0.33/ 0.17F 0.17/
ME 0.33/ 0.29/ 0.25M 0.31F 0.26F 0.02M 0.31F 0.33/ 0.25F 0.18M
SG 0.02M 0.25M 0.22M 0.33/ 0.25M 0.20M 0.30M 0.23M 0.24/ 0.17M
MG 0.31M 0.25M 0.25F 0.33/ 0.25F 0.26M 0.29M 0.31M 0.25M 0.18/
tree regression performed best in 37.5% of cases, especiall y
with complex, nonlinear data patterns. Distribution-base d rules
(15%) and generators (7.5%) were less frequently the best,
indicating their more specialized use cases.
Regarding EQ2, update rules for event attributes applied
when attributes were modiﬁed by single or multiple activiti es
(SE, ME) were generally well-approximated, with linear and
decision tree regressions performing satisfactorily. The EMD
values for these cases shown in Table II were relatively
low, considering it is a global metric whose value ranges
vary from the dataset, indicating a good approximation when
applied in event attribute scope. Update rules over global
attributes scope, especially those modiﬁed by multiple eve nts
(MG), posed more challenges but resulted in reasonably low
EMD values in many cases. The difﬁculty increases with
the accumulated effects of various events, yet the models
often maintain a good approximation level. The only two
incorrect approximations, i.e., the worst evaluations, we re in
scenarios involving exponential growth ( EG) and conditional
exponential growth ( CE) for global attributes ( SG and MG).
These resulted in signiﬁcantly high EMD values due to system
overﬂow caused by the fast growth.
Table III shows the KS results for the discovered update
rules across 40 synthetic categorical datasets using Marko vian
models (M) and probabilistic generators (F) as qualiﬁers.
Correct attribute classiﬁcations are in green; misclassiﬁ cations
are in red, and cases where the KS value was identical for
both event-based and global classiﬁcations are in blue. The
superscript “/” indicates results were the same for Marko-
vian models and probabilistic generators, so either could b e
used. Regarding EQ1 and EQ2, the models performed well
in classifying categorical attributes and their update rul es,
respectively. Misclassiﬁcations occurred in 15% of the cas es,
primarily in more complex scenarios with multiple update
rules modifying the attributes, i.e., ME and MG. Still, in those
cases, differences between global and event-based KS evalu -
ations were very close, and the overall low KS values across
most classiﬁcations indicate that these misclassiﬁcation s have
a minimal impact on overall estimation accuracy.
More speciﬁcally, regarding EQ2, update rules by proba-
bilistic generators (F) generally provided good approxima tions
TABLE IV: 3-gram results for synthetic XOR gateways
EQ UB RD ND ED CC1 CC2 CC3 CC4 CC5
EVENTpure
NDAS 0.057 0.000 0.053 0.046 0.042 0.047 0.046 0.047 0.041 0.056
DAS 0.046 0.000 0.041 0.041 0.040 0.050 0.043 0.047 0.030 0.040
noise
NDAS 0.050 0.030 0.043 0.044 0.035 0.043 0.046 0.047 0.050 0.042
DAS 0.145 0.177 0.138 0.069 0.085 0.041 0.091 0.046 0.105 0.060
CASEpure
NDAS 0.205 0.000 0.193 0.195 0.185 0.109 0.201 0.080 0.192 0.196
DAS 0.042 0.000 0.020 0.029 0.031 0.114 0.099 0.081 0.032 0.036
noise
NDAS 0.174 0.076 0.160 0.163 0.156 0.142 0.164 0.089 0.140 0.142
DAS 0.131 0.140 0.143 0.117 0.084 0.146 0.060 0.092 0.131 0.112
for single-event modiﬁcations ( SE), although both Markovian
models and generators could equally model eight patterns in
SE. Both models performed well for multiple-event modiﬁ-
cations ( ME), with some misclassiﬁcations in uniform event-
based scenarios. Markovian models performed better in glob al
settings with many changes and long-term dependencies, mak -
ing them more suitable for complex problems requiring more
persistent relationships. Markovian models also performe d
well under single modiﬁcations, making them a preferred
choice over probabilistic generators in most cases.
Concluding with EQ1 and EQ2, the 10 synthetic scenarios
related to case attributes were classiﬁed correctly, showi ng
low EMD and KS values. The full results are available in
the reproducibility package.
In the following, we focus on answering EQ3. Table IV
presents the 3-gram results for synthetic XOR gateways acro ss
the 40 synthetic scenarios, including event-based and case -
based settings, with and without noise. The results assess
how well the Data-A ware Model (DAS) replicates the process
control ﬂow compared to the Data-Unaware Model (NDAS).
Cells highlighted in light blue indicate the lowest values i n
each column, indicating the best performance.
In scenarios with event-based attributes without noise,
both NDAS and DAS performed well, but DAS consistently
achieved lower values. In the presence of noise, NDAS per-
forms better, suggesting it is more resilient to noise in eve nt-
based scenarios. Y et, the evaluation for XOR gateways shows
comparable results when assuming event-based attributes.
However, the DAS model outperformed NDAS in settings
with case-based attributes, achieving lower values across most
scenarios, including noisy and non-noisy ones. Therefore, it
indicates the ability of the data-aware model to capture lon ger-
distance associations compared to the data-unaware model.
For example, event-based conditions in the DAS relied on
values that were updated stochastically before each gatewa y.
On the other hand, the case-based conditions relied on the
same attribute value across each gateway, a behavior that
probabilistic (NDAS) models cannot replicate as they roll a
die at each decision point.
Table V presents the 3-gram results for synthetic OR
gateways across 20 synthetic scenarios, including event-b ased,
in which 1, 2, and 5 ﬂow arcs are activated, and a last scenario
with 20% of added noise. Here, the DAS consistently beats the
NDAS, achieving lower values in all measured categories. Th e
DAS superiority is more evident in scenarios with multiple

===== PAGE 8 / 8 =====

TABLE V: 3-gram results for synthetic OR gateways
EQ UB ND ED CC
NDAS DAS NDAS DAS NDAS DAS NDAS DAS NDAS DAS
F1 0.175 0.036 0.000 0.000 0.167 0.048 0.157 0.041 0.172 0.028
F2 0.279 0.042 0.382 0.015 0.193 0.047 0.177 0.036 0.222 0.055
F5 0.632 0.053 0.636 0.056 0.637 0.060 0.636 0.056 0.635 0.051
Noise 0.134 0.048 0.091 0 .141 0.146 0.069 0.136 0.067 0.149 0.059
TABLE VI: Real-Life Logs Results
Log NDAS DAS Case Global Event
Traﬁc 0.763 0.751 1 0 7
Sepsis 0.813 0.795 1 3 23
BPIC19 0.953 0.927 12 0 0
paths and data dependencies, e.g., ﬁve ﬂow paths enabled
simultaneously (F5). The performance differences between
DAS and NDAS are bigger in OR than in XOR gateways.
XOR gateways are simpler, directing the ﬂow to one path,
which allows NDAS to perform relatively well. However,
in OR gateways, the randomness of choosing multiple paths
(like rolling a die) plays against NDAS. DAS handles these
complexities and data-driven decisions better, giving it a n edge
in accurately replicating control ﬂow.
Finally, Table VI compares the performance of the DAS
and NDAS across three real-life logs using the 3-gram metric
and additionally shows the types of attributes discovered b y
the DAS. Although DAS performed better than NDAS in the
3 logs, the differences in the metric were minor, indicating
comparable results. These ﬁndings align with the synthetic
evaluation results, where NDAS performed relatively well w ith
XOR gateways, the only type present in the event logs. The
(slightly) bigger difference was observed in the BPIC19 log ,
where DAS discovered only case-based attributes, consiste nt
with synthetic evaluations showing DAS’s strength in such
scenarios. While the speciﬁc attribute types in the real-li fe
logs are unknown, the models’ accurate replication of contr ol
ﬂow suggests that the classiﬁcation aligns with the process
behavior. Full results, including EMD and KS metrics, are
available in the reproducibility package.
Reproducibility. The source code, datasets, models, and in-
structions to reproduce the experiments can be found at:
https://github.com/orlenyslp/DAS-RP. This repository a lso in-
cludes additional details on the experiment setup and resul ts.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper introduced a data-aware BPS modeling approach
and a method to discover such models from event logs.
The approach supports three types of data attributes (globa l,
case-level, and event-level) and incorporates determinis tic and
stochastic attribute update rules and data-aware branchin g con-
ditions. The experimental evaluation shows that the techni ques
for discovering update rules capture a range of common func-
tions and that, in the context of real-life logs, the discove red
data-aware models more closely replicate the observed trac es
relative to data-unaware simulation models.
The proposed approach discovers rules where the new value
of an attribute, after a given activity is executed, depends only
on this attribute’s previous value. In future work, we plan t o
extend the approach to discover update rules where the updat ed
value of an attribute is a function over multiple attributes .
Meanwhile, in the proposed BPS, data attributes determine
the behavior of the process at the control-ﬂow level only
(via branching conditions on the decision gateways). Anoth er
future work direction is to extend the proposed BPS modeling
and discovery approach to capture situations where the star t
time or duration of activities may depend on the data attribu tes.
For example, in a loan origination process, the duration of a n
activity “Assess credit risk” may depend on attributes such as
the type of loan and the requested loan amount.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Rozinat, R. S. Mans, M. Song, and W. M. P . V . Aalst, “Disc overing
simulation models,” Inf. Syst. , vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 305–327, 2009.
[2] M. Camargo, M. Dumas, and O. Gonz´ alez, “Automated disco very of
business process simulation models from event logs,” Decis. Support
Syst., vol. 134, p. 113284, 2020.
[3] B. Estrada-Torres, M. Camargo, M. Dumas, L. Garc´ ıa-Ba˜ nuelos,
I. Mahdy, and M. Y erokhin, “Discovering business process si mulation
models in the presence of multitasking and availability con straints,” Data
Knowl. Eng. , vol. 134, p. 101897, 2021.
[4] O. L ´ opez-Pintado, M. Dumas, and J. Berx, “Discovery, si mulation, and
optimization of business processes with differentiated re sources,” Inf.
Syst., vol. 120, p. 102289, 2024.
[5] M. Pourbafrani and W. M. P . van der Aalst, “Discovering sy stem dy-
namics simulation models using process mining,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 78 527–78 547, 2022.
[6] M. Camargo, M. Dumas, and O. G. Rojas, “Learning accurate business
process simulation models from event logs via automated pro cess
discovery and deep learning,” in CAiSE 2022 , ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. Springer, 2022, pp. 55–71.
[7] F. Meneghello, C. D. Francescomarino, and C. Ghidini, “R untime
integration of machine learning and simulation for busines s processes,”
in ICPM 2023 . IEEE, 2023, pp. 9–16.
[8] M. de Leoni, F. Vinci, S. J. J. Leemans, and F. Mannhardt, “ Investigating
the inﬂuence of data-aware process states on activity proba bilities in
simulation models: Does accuracy improve?” in BPM 2023 . Springer,
2023, pp. 129–145.
[9] A. Burke, S. J. J. Leemans, and M. T. Wynn, “Stochastic pro cess
discovery by weight estimation,” in Process Mining W orkshops - ICPM
2020 International W orkshops, Padua, Italy, October 5-8, 2 020, Revised
Selected Papers. Springer, 2020, pp. 260–272.
[10] F. Mannhardt, S. J. J. Leemans, C. T. Schwanen, and M. de L eoni,
“Modelling data-aware stochastic processes - discovery an d confor-
mance checking,” in PETRI NETS 2023 . Springer, 2023, pp. 77–98.
[11] F. Mannhardt, M. de Leoni, H. A. Reijers, and W. M. P . van d er Aalst,
“Decision mining revisited - discovering overlapping rule s,” in CAiSE
2016, vol. 9694. Springer, 2016, pp. 377–392.
[12] J. D. Smedt, F. Hasic, S. K. L. M. vanden Broucke, and J. V a nthienen,
“Holistic discovery of decision models from process execut ion data,”
Knowl. Based Syst. , vol. 183, 2019.
[13] W. M. P . van der Aalst, Process Mining - Data Science in Action, Second
Edition. Springer, 2016.
[14] O. L ´ opez-Pintado, I. Halenok, and M. Dumas, “Prosimos : Discovering
and simulating business processes with differentiated res ources,” in
EDOC 2022 W orkshops. Springer, 2022, pp. 346–352.
[15] C. L. Canonne, “A survey on distribution testing: Y our d ata is big. but
is it blue?” Theory of Computing , pp. 1–100, 2020.
[16] D. Chapela-Campa, I. Benchekroun, O. Baron, M. Dumas, D . Krass,
and A. Senderovich, “Can i trust my simulation model? measur ing the
quality of business process simulation models,” in BPM 2023. Springer,
2023.