

===== PAGE 1 / 18 =====

 
Investigating the Influence of Data-Aware Process States on
Activity Probabilities in Simulation Models
Citation for published version (APA):
de Leoni, M., Vinci, F., Leemans, S. J. J., & Mannhardt, F. (2023). Investigating the Influence of Data-Aware
Process States on Activity Probabilities in Simulation Models: Does Accuracy Improve? In C. Di
Francescomarino, A. Burattin, C. Janiesch, & S. Sadiq (Eds.), Business Process Management: 21st International
Conference, BPM 2023, Utrecht, The Netherlands, September 11–15, 2023, Proceedings (pp. 129-145).
(Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS); Vol. 14159). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-41620-
0_8
Document license:
TAVERNE
DOI:
10.1007/978-3-031-41620-0_8
Document status and date:
Published: 01/09/2023
Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 03. Aug.. 2026

===== PAGE 2 / 18 =====

Investigating the Inﬂuence of Data-Aware
Process States on Activity Probabilities
in Simulation Models: Does Accuracy
Improve?
Massimiliano de Leoni1, Francesco Vinci1(B), Sander J. J. Leemans2,
and Felix Mannhardt3
1 University of Padua, Padua, Italy
massimiliano.deleoni@unipd.it, francesco.vinci.1@phd.unipd.it
2 RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany
s.leemans@bpm.rwth-aachen.de
3 Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
f.mannhardt@tue.nl
Abstract. Business process simulation enables analysts to run a pro-
cess in diﬀerent scenarios, compare its performances and consequently
provide indications on how to improve a business process. Process sim-
ulation requires one to provide a simulation model, which should accu-
rately reﬂect reality to ensure the reliability of the simulation ﬁndings.
An accurate simulation model passes through a correct stochastic mod-
elling of the activity ﬁrings: activities are associated with the probability
of each to ﬁre. Literature determines these probabilities by looking at
the frequency of the activity occurrences when they are enabled. This is
a coarse determination, because this way does not consider the actual
process state, which might inﬂuence the probabilities themselves (e.g.,
a thorough loan assessment is more likely for larger loan requests). The
process state is as a faithful abstraction of the process instance execution
so far, including the process-variable values, the activity ﬁring history,
etc. This paper aims to investigate how process states can be leveraged
to improve activity ﬁring probabilities. A technique has been put forward
and compared with the baseline where basic branching probabilities are
employed. Experimental results show that, indeed, business simulation
models are more accurate to replicate the real process’ behavior.
Keywords: Process Simulation
· Stochastic Models · Branching
Probabilities · Process Mining
1 Introduction
Business process simulation refers to techniques for the simulation of business
process behavior on the basis of a process simulation model, a process model
extended with additional information for a probabilistic characterization of the
diﬀerent run-time aspects (case arrival rate, activity durations and probabilities,
c⃝ The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
C. Di Francescomarino et al. (Eds.): BPM 2023, LNCS 14159, pp. 129–145, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-41620-0
_8

===== PAGE 3 / 18 =====

130 M. de Leoni et al.
roles, etc.). Simulation provides a ﬂexible approach to analyse and improve busi-
ness processes. Through simulation experiments, various ’what if’ questions can
be answered, and redesigning alternatives can be compared with respect to some
key performance indicators. The main idea of business process simulation is to
carry out a signiﬁcantly large number of runs, in accordance with a simulation
model. Statistics over these runs are collected to gain insight into the processes,
and to determine the possible issues (bottlenecks, wastes, costs, etc.). By apply-
ing diﬀerent changes to the simulation model, one can assess the consequences of
these changes without putting them in production, and consequently can explore
dimensions to possible process improvements.
A successful application of business process simulation for process improve-
ment relies on a simulation model that reﬂects the real process behavior; con-
clusions drawn on an unrealistic simulation model lead to process redesigns that
may not yield improvements, or even may worsen the performances. A large body
of research work has already focused on accurately creating process models and
several of their run-time aspects (cf. Sect.5), including case arrival rate, activity
durations, and roles. However, no recent work has focused on accurately estimat-
ing, given a set of enabled activities at run time, the probability of each to occur.
Currently, this determination is solely based on the branching probabilities. Of
course, this is a course determination, which does not consider that probabilities
of activities to occur may vary as function of the characteristics of the process
instances, the activities that previously occurred in the same process instance,
time-related information, etc. Consider, for example, a loan application process:
the probability of executing an activity about a thorough assessment grows, e.g.,
with the amount of the requested loan, and decreases with annual salary of the
applicant. Also, the probability of rejecting an application may grow with the
number of requests to the applicant of providing further documents.
This paper introduces the concept of process state, which is a faithful abstrac-
tion of a case, and investigates the research question how a proper choice of this
abstraction allows a more accurate estimation of the activity ﬁring probabilities
of simulation models, with respect to the simple branching probabilities. More
accurate ﬁring probabilities lead to more accurate simulation models.
In order to answer this research question, the paper builds upon Petri nets,
and discovers a so-called weight function for each transition, which is deﬁned
over a process state, which, e.g., can include process variables, and the transition-
ﬁring history. Then, for the cases that are simulated, the current process state
is computed and used to evaluate the weight function of the transitions that are
enabled at that point. The probability to ﬁre a transition is thus obtained as
the ratio of its weight and the sum of the weights of all enabled transitions. It
follows that the higher is the weight of a transition, the higher is the probabil-
ity of that transition to ﬁre. Since the case characteristics that may inﬂuence
the probability may depend on the speciﬁc process that is being simulated, we
propose a framework where the process-state abstraction can be customized to
include or exclude certain characteristics. In Sect. 2, some examples for process
states are provided. In this paper, we report on the use of logistic regression to

===== PAGE 4 / 18 =====

Inﬂuence of Data-Aware Process States on Activity Probabilities 131
learn the weight function, but other approaches could be alternatively employed,
such as regression trees.
The research question is ﬁnally answered by applying the aforementioned
framework to two real-life processes, each with a real-life event log. For each
process, ﬁve diﬀerent deﬁnitions of process states have been considered to com-
pute weights of the Petri-net models of the two processes to be simulated. The
results show that the simulation using models with transition probabilities based
on process states allows obtaining simulation results that are more accurate, if
compared with simulation models based on branching probabilities.
Section 2 starts introducing the preliminary concepts of event logs, and then
continues (i) introducing the novel notion of the process-state abstraction and
(ii) their usage with stochastic labelled Data Petri nets, a Petri-net extension
to associate weights to transitions. Section3 discusses how to compute the tran-
sition weights as function of a customizable abstraction of the process state.
Section4 illustrates how Stochastic labelled Data Petri nets can be represented
via Coloured Petri nets in CPN Tools, and reports on the beneﬁts for simulation
models to use transition probabilities based on process states. Section 5 reports
on the related works, and Sect.6 concludes the paper.
2 Event Logs and Stochastic Data Petri Nets
The determination of the weights is obtained from an analysis of an event log of
the process that aims to be simulated:
Deﬁnition 1 (Events). Let A be the set of process’ activities. Let V the set of
process attributes. Let WV be a function that assigns a domain WV(x) to each
process attribute x ∈V .L e t W = ∪x∈V WV(x). An event is a tuple (a, v) ∈
A× (V ̸→ W) where a is the event activity, v is a partial function assigning
values to process attributes with v(x) ∈W V(x).
A trace is a sequence of events, the same event can potentially occur in diﬀerent
traces, namely attributes are given the same assignment in diﬀerent traces. This
means that potentially the entire same trace can appear multiple times. This
motivates why an event log is to be deﬁned as a multiset of traces:1
Deﬁnition 2 (T races & Event Logs). Let E = A× (V ̸→ W) be the universe
of events. A trace σ is a sequence of events, i.e. σ ∈E ∗. An event-log L is a
multiset of traces, i.e. L⊂ B(E∗).
In this paper, simulation models are provided in form of so-called Stochastic
Labelled Data Petri Nets (SLDPNs). While SLDPNs are not able to represent
every aspect relevant for simulation models, they are simple, yet suﬃcient to
discuss and formalize the concepts behind activity probabilities. In SLDPNs, a
transition ﬁring consists in executing a transition and assigning values to some
process attributes. The sequence of transition ﬁrings determines the process
state:
1 B(X) indicates the set of all multisets with the elements in set X.

===== PAGE 5 / 18 =====

132 M. de Leoni et al.
p0 a
p1
p2
b
1
2X
c
1
2X
d
1 − 1
X
p3
p4
e p5
Fig. 1. Example of a Stochastic Data Petri Net. Transitions are annotated with the
weights, when the latter are present.
Deﬁnition 3 (Process State). Let T be a set of transitions. Let V the set of
process attributes. Let WV be a function that assigns a domain WV(x) to each
process attribute x ∈V .L e t W = ∪x∈V WV(x).L e t Δ be the set of process states.
A process-state function maps a sequence of transition ﬁrings to a process state:
SΔ :( T × (V ̸→ W))∗ → Δ .
Note that the marking is not part of the process state (see below). A process-state
function can be customized, according to the speciﬁc domain. For instance, if
one wants to account for the process attributes in the setV, the setΔ of possible
process states consists of tuples ( x1,...,x n) where xi is the value assigned to
variable vi ∈V , after deﬁning an ordering of the attributes in V. In particular,
for a sequenceσ = ⟨(t1,f 1),..., (tm,fm)⟩ of transition ﬁrings, SΔ returns a tuple
(x1,...,x n)i nw h i c hxi is the latest value assigned to vi in σ, namely there is
a transition ﬁring ( tj,fj) ∈ σ such that fj(vi)= xi and, for all j<k ≤ m, vi is
not in the domain of fk.
In SLDPNs, each transition is associated to a weight function that is depen-
dent on a process state.
Deﬁnition 4 (Stochastic Labelled Data Petri Net - syntax). Let A be
a set of activities, and Δ the set of possible process states. A stochastic labelled
data Petri net (SLDPN) is a tuple (P,T,F,λ,Δ,M 0, w), such that (P,T,F ) is
a Petri Net, λ : T ̸→A be a labelling function, M0 is the initial marking, and
w: T × Δ → R+ is a weight function.
Example. Figure1 shows an example of an SLDPN. The control ﬂow of this
SLDPN consists of an AND split followed by the parallel executions of b and
a choice between c and d. The transitions are annotated with weight functions
depending on the continuous variable X.
The state of an SLDPN is the combination of a marking and an process
state d ∈ Δ . Hereafter, when clear from the context, the process state is simply
referred to as state. The marking determines which transitions are enabled, while
the process state inﬂuences the probabilities of transitions:

===== PAGE 6 / 18 =====

Inﬂuence of Data-Aware Process States on Activity Probabilities 133
Deﬁnition 5 (Stochastic Labelled Data Petri Net - semantics). Let
N =( P,T,F,λ,Δ,M 0, w) be an SLDPN. Let σ ∈ (T ×(V ̸→ W))∗ be a sequence
of transition ﬁrings, leading to marking M .L e tSΔ be the process-state function,
and E(M) ⊆ T be the set of transitions enabled at marking M of Petri net
(P,T,F ). The probability to ﬁre t after σ is:
PrN (t, M, σ)= w(t, SΔ (σ))∑
t′∈E(M ) w(t′,SΔ (σ)).
3 Framework for Determination of Weights
In this section, we introduce a framework that, given an event log L,aP e t r i
net (P,T,F ), a labelling function λ and an initial marking M0, can be used to
determine the weights of the transitions, thereby transform the Petri net into
an SLDPN. The framework can be instantiated for a process-state functionSΔ ,
generalising the proposal in [ 10], and a parameterised weight function w,a n d
consists of four steps:
Step 1 For each traceσ ∈L , reconstruct the corresponding path of transitions
that σ took through the model. This reconstruction is performed using
a sequence of moves: a synchronous move combines an event (a, v)i n
the log trace with a transition t on the model path such that λ(t)= a;
a model move is a transition on the model path; while a log move is an
event in the log trace. Such a sequence of moves, where the projection
of the sequential synchronous and log moves yields the trace, and the
projection of the sequential synchronous and model moves yields the
path, is called an alignment [1].
For a given trace of the event log, an optimal alignment is an alignment
with a minimal number of log and model moves
2, over all paths in the
model. Note that this alignment does not need to take the data values
or weight functions into account and can be computed solely based on
the regular Petri net and each trace of the event log.
Step 2 For one optimal alignment of each trace in the event log, we use the
process-state function S
Δ to reconstruct the sequence of process states
Δ . By deﬁnition, any path of the model starts in the initial markingM0
and the process stateSΔ (⟨⟩ ). For each synchronous or model movem in
the optimal alignment, we have a transitiont available. As the moves are
sequential, we can take the partial function assigning values to process
attributes (v) from the last synchronous move in the alignment, before
m. If no such last move exists, we take an empty function.
As such, we obtain a sequence of transition ﬁrings ( t, v). Through SΔ ,
this sequence yields a sequence of process states δ∈ Δ . Similarly, the
sequence of markings can be derived from the model and the sequence
of transition ﬁrings.
2 For the minimalisation, we do not count model moves on unlabelled transitions.

===== PAGE 7 / 18 =====

134 M. de Leoni et al.
Step 3 For each transition t in the model, we gather the observations made in
each trace σ of the log related to this transition: each time that t was
enabled and ﬁred in the sequence of transition ﬁrings, the associated
process state before ﬁring t is recorded as positive observation. Each
time that t was enabled but another transition ﬁred a negative obser-
vation using the process state before ﬁring that transition is recorded.
Given these collected multisets of positive process states Δ t+ ⊂ B(Δ )
and negative process statesΔ t− ⊂ B(Δ ) we build a training set to learn
the inﬂuence of process states on the weight of transition t as:
⨄
δ∈Δ t+
[(δ,1)] ∪
⨄
δ∈Δ t−
[(δ,0)]
Step 4 We leverage any suitable machine learning model that supports the
process state representation chosen as input to serve as parameterised
weight function w. Such a model should assign higher weights, e.g., the
1 in the training set, for those process states in which the transition t
was observed to occur opposed to those in which another transition was
observed. We can obtain the overall parameterised weight function by
ﬁtting a separate model for each transition t since the weights obtained
for enabled transitions in the SLDPN are not required to sum up to 1.
As an example, we instantiate our framework with a process state function S
Δ
that takes into account (i) the event attribute values observed for the ﬁrst event
in a trace and (ii) the count of the activity occurrences in the history of the
process instance:
SΔ (⟨(t1,v 1),..., (tn,vn)⟩)=( v1,[t1,...t n]).
Our process state is, thus, deﬁned as Δ =( V ̸→ W) × B(T). We use the logistic
function over the same attribute values and history as parameterised weight
function w.
Assume the example traceσ = ⟨aX=3,dX=4,dX=5,bX=3,eX=5⟩ with a single
process attribute X. We align σ in Step 1 to the model shown in Fig. 1. This
alignment is:
Log aX=3 dX=4 dX=5 bX=3 eX=5
Model a d - b e
In Step 2, we transform this alignment into a sequence of process states:
⟨(X =3 ,[a]),(X =3 ,[a, d]),(X =3 ,[a, b, d]),(X =3 ,[a, b, d, e])⟩

===== PAGE 8 / 18 =====

Inﬂuence of Data-Aware Process States on Activity Probabilities 135
Then, Step 3 constructs the observations:
Δ a+ =[ (X = ⊥,[])] Δ a− =[ ]
Δ b+ =[ (X =3 ,[a, d])] Δ b− =[ (X =3 ,[a])]
Δ c+ =[ ] Δ c− =[ (X =3 ,[a])]
Δ d+ =[ (X =3 ,[a])] Δ d− =[ ]
Δ e+ =[ (X =3 ,[a, b, d])] Δ e− =[ ]
In the ﬁnal Step 4 the weight function is then approximated using logistic regres-
sion for each of the transitions using the training sets build from positive and
negative observations. We use logistic regression since it provides white-box
explanations and is more usable for simulators such as CPN Tools. Moreover,
white-box simulators can be used for what-if analysis, whereas deep learning
models cannot [6]. Logistic regression, and many other machine learning models,
requires input variables to be numeric. Thus, we need to transform the multiset
of activity occurrences into several variables, one for each activity in the pro-
cess model. Similarly, we could use one-hot encoding for categorical variables.
Finally, we obtain the coeﬃcients for the logistic function and obtain the ﬁnal
SLDPN including the learned weight function.
4 Experiments
The experiment focuses on verifying the similarity between the original event logs
and those obtained from simulation. Our probability model of activity ﬁring is
only supported by CPN Tools, which includes simulation features.
Section 4.1 illustrates the case studies that are used to assess the validity of
the proposed approach. Section 4.2 discusses the experimental setup, including
how CPN Tools has been employed to deﬁne our probability model. Finally,
Sect.4.3 reports the results, and discusses the ﬁndings.
4.1 Case Studies
The approach has been evaluated in two diﬀerent case studies for which a public
event log and a reference model is available: Road-Traﬃc Fines and Sepsis (see [9]
for details).
The Road Traﬃc Fines event log describes the process of managing road
traﬃc ﬁnes by a local police force in Italy. The event log contains 150370 traces
and 11 diﬀerent activities, with 12 data attributes. Sepsis case study is a real-
life event log obtained from an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system
of a regional hospital in The Netherlands. It contains 1050 traces, 16 diﬀerent
activities and several data attributes, most of them binary.
Figures2 and 3 depicts the Petri Net models used for our evaluations, which
are shown in Fig. 12.8 and Fig. 13.3 of [9]. The Road-Traﬃc Fines model allows

===== PAGE 9 / 18 =====

136 M. de Leoni et al.
Fig. 2. Road-Traﬃc Fines Petri Net model.
executions with only one activity, i.e.Create Fine , however, the event log does
not contain any trace such that. This led us to improve the model: a place and
a transition after the ﬁrst Payment are added to maintain the loop of it and
remove the possibility of ending the trace after Create Fine .
4.2 Experimental Setup
The assessment is based on comparing the similarity of the original event logs
with those obtained via simulation. The simulation models are constructed using
ﬁve diﬀerent characterization of the process state: with data only, namely using
the values of the process attributes; with history only, namely using the num-
ber of occurrences of process activities; and with data and history, as well as

===== PAGE 10 / 18 =====

Inﬂuence of Data-Aware Process States on Activity Probabilities 137
Fig. 3. Sepsis Petri Net model.
with combinations of so-called binary history. History is also delineated in the
binary version, where we only consider whether or not an activity has hap-
pened, irrespectively of the number of occurrences. As baseline of comparison,
we also built the simulation model using branching probabilities, which were
computed through the Multi-perspective Process Explorer [11]. The comparison
of the original event log and those obtained via simulation is computed through
the Earth-Movers’ Stochastic distance introduced in [8]. This measure considers

===== PAGE 11 / 18 =====

138 M. de Leoni et al.
the stochastic characteristics of the event logs: which activities are executed in
which order, and how often a particular order of activities is executed.
For evaluating our approach, we divided the original logs into training and
test sets using a temporal split: 70% to the training set and 30% to the test
set. The training set was utilized to calculate the weights of the corresponding
SLDPNs, and also the branching probabilities of the comparison baseline. By
comparing the results of them, we can determine the eﬀectiveness of our approach
and assess the impact of diﬀerent processing techniques on performance.
We instantiated the framework for determining the weights described in
Sect.3 in ProM by encoding the process state obtained into a set of attributes
and implemented the parameterised weight function as a set of logistic regression
models over that set of attributes and the binary dependent response variable.
We use ridge regression as implemented in WEKA 3.8 [17] and implemented an
export functionality to obtain the resulting coeﬃcients β
0,...,β n of the logistic
model that are suﬃcient to determine the weight. More complex models may be
added to the implementation in the future as long as their parameters can be
used to compute weights based on process states. After exporting the logistic
regression coeﬃcients, we use them in the simulation models.
The simulation models are implemented using CPN Tools. In fact, one of
the key advantages of CPN Tools is the ability to model and analyze complex
systems. Additionally, the Standard ML programming language can be used
to implement custom functions, making it possible to adapt the model to the
speciﬁc needs of the simulation.
We illustrate how SLDPNs can be represented via CPN Tools through a
simple example. In particular, we focus on the SLDPN in Fig.1. The CPN model
consists of several parts, each with a speciﬁc function. The black part represents
the Petri Net underneath, while the blue part focuses on the simulation of the
CPN Tools: n
sim process instances are simulated one at time until the previous
instance is completed. Note that this does not aﬀect the event log similarity since
the evaluation is based on control-ﬂow and not on time-related measurements.
This is done here for the sake of simplicity: it is trivial to extend it to allow for
multiple process instance executions at the same time.
The brown part is related to generating the values of the process attributes
for the diﬀerent simulated traces. The literature proposes to assign a suitable
statistical distribution to each process attribute (cf. Sect. 5): values are then
sampled from those distributions. However, this might introduce noise in the
experiments, if suitable distributions are not found. This ultimately leads to an
unfair comparison of the original event log and that obtained from simulation.
Recall that we simulate as many process instances, i.e. traces, as those in the
original event log. We leverage on this, and, for each trace of the original event
log, we use the same set of process-attribute values for one process instance that
is simulated.
The green part of the model checks the enabled transitions and the trace
history. Finally, the purple part is responsible for computing the probabilities of

===== PAGE 12 / 18 =====

Inﬂuence of Data-Aware Process States on Activity Probabilities 139
Fig. 4. Implementation of the SLDPN in Fig.1 in CPN Tools.
ﬁring the enabled transitions using the weights obtained by the logistic regression
models.
The arc inscriptions in the CPN Tools model example are used to implement
the SLDPN models: thegetData function returns a list of real value representing
the i-th data state; the updateE function returns a tuple (enabled, actEx) ,
where enabled is the list of strings of the enabled transitions after having exe-
cuted a certain transition, and actEx is a list of real values of length number
of activities in which each value represents how many time the correspondent
activity has been performed; getT returns the transition to ﬁre according to the
probabilities computed using a function that implements the formula in Deﬁni-
tion 5, where w is the logistic regression using the coeﬃcients exported from the
Prom Plug-In (Fig.4).
This procedure is then applied to the Road-Traﬃc Fine and Sepsis SLDPNs.
Each simulated model has been used to generate as many traces as those in the
original event log (respectively, 150370 and 1050 traces). The simulation reports
generated by CPN Tools have been converted to obtain event logs in XES ﬁles
using a parser which we implemented in Python.
3
4.3 Experimental Results
For each case study, we have thus computed six simulation models, using proba-
bilities based on the branching probabilities and on the weights with ﬁve diﬀer-
ent process-state abstractions. Each simulation model has been run ten times,
to mitigate the stochasticity of simulation.
Table1 shows the ﬁnal results for each simulation model and case study. The
reported measures are the average of the Earth Movers’ distances between each
simulated event log and the real one. The value in brackets are the maximum
3 https://github.com/franvinci/InﬂuenceofDataawareProcessStatesonActivityProbabilities.

===== PAGE 13 / 18 =====

140 M. de Leoni et al.
T able 1.Average Earth Movers’ distance (with absolute error) for each conﬁguration.
Case Study Branching Data History Data Bin Data
Prob. &H i s t o r yHistory &B i n .H i s t o r y
Road-Traﬃc Fines 0.8793 0.8831 0.9526 0.9542 0.9352 0.9427
(±0.001) (±0.001) (±0.001) (±0.001) (±0.001) (±0.001)
Sepsis 0.5309 0.6245 - - 0.5906 0.6201
(±0.008) (±0.009) - - (±0.005) (±0.006)
Fig. 5. Road-Traﬃc Fines absolute errors of the probabilities of occurrence of an activ-
ity aj (columns) immediately after ai (rows) between the real and the simulated event
logs. Left: using branching probabilities. Right: using data and history. Darker colours
indicate lower errors.
variation of similarity for each of ten simulated logs obtained for each conﬁgura-
tion, wrt. the original event log. Note how the variation is negligible (less than
1%), thus positively hinting at the reliability of the results.
In the Road-Traﬃc Fines case study, it can be noticed a slight improvement in
log similarity using only data features. However, by adding history, our approach
outperforms the baseline of 7.5%: this suggests that, for this case, the data alone
are insuﬃcient for capturing the control ﬂow stochasticity, while the history
features provide valuable insights. Binary history also leads to good performance.
However, conﬁgurations with history states perform better.
On the other hand, in the Sepsis case study, using the data features without
history results in a 9 .4% increase in baseline performance, proving that com-
puting ﬁring probabilities based on these features can lead to more accurate
simulation models. We were unable to perform the experiments for the Sepsis
case study when the process state abstraction includes the history. Indeed, the

===== PAGE 14 / 18 =====

Inﬂuence of Data-Aware Process States on Activity Probabilities 141
Fig. 6. Sepsis absolute errors of the probabilities of occurrence of an activity aj
(columns) immediately after ai (rows) between the real and the simulated event logs.
Left: using branching probabilities. Right: using data. Darker colours indicate lower
errors.
simulation was often blocked in a livelock: the weight function associated to the
transition with label Leucocytes in the loop was typically returning weights
close to 1 in most of process states, due to the history being included in the pro-
cess state. This causes a loop to be inﬁnitely repeating. This issue is certainly
due to the nature of the method to synthesize the weight function, namely the
use of logistic regression: it is likely the case that, because logistic regression
is only able to synthesize weight function of a certain nature, the synthesis is
unable to ﬁnd a suitable weight function for transition with label Leucocytes.
Thus, we decided to employ a binary history, namely that only accounts whether
a transition has ﬁred or not in the past, independently of the number of times.
The conﬁguration using only binary history outperforms the baseline of 6%.
However, the results with the conﬁguration with both data and binary history
states are similar to those using only data: this could be due to correlations
between the features.
To investigate which aspects of the simulation are improved in the best con-
ﬁguration for each case study compared to the baseline, we computed for each
activity pair (a
i,aj), the probability of aj executing immediately after ai, given
that ai has been executed. This probability has been computed as the ratio
between the number of timesaj immediately follows ai and the number of times
ai is executed: |ai → aj|/|ai|. When a given activitya is the ﬁrst of the trace, we
have a ﬁctitious previous activity start to indicate this, namely a pair (start,a).
Similarly, we introduce a ﬁctitious activity end. We then compared these proba-
bilities with those from the real event log. Given any immediately follow relation
ai → aj, we computed the absolute error as
⏐⏐preal
ij − psim
ij
⏐⏐, where preal
ij and psim
ij
are the probability described above for the real and simulated logs, respectively.

===== PAGE 15 / 18 =====

142 M. de Leoni et al.
Figures 5 and 6 illustrate the absolute errors for the two cases. In particular,
in the Road-Traﬃc Fines case study, our approach seems to work better when
Insert Fine Notification and Add penalty are executed. Indeed, it can be
noticed that the probabilities of Add penalty , Send for Credit Collection
and end immediately occurring after Insert Fine Notification are more sim-
ilar to the real ones using our approach, since the error is closer to zero. Similarly
for Add penalty .
In the Sepsis case, our method is more accurate after the execution of ER
Registration and ER Triage , and in the ﬁnal activities: looking at the cells
(ER Registration , ER Triage ), (ER Triage , ER Sepsis Triage ), and the cells
of the end column, errors are smaller using data than using simply branching
probabilities.
There are some cases in which the error is greater with our approach than
with the basic one. This is probably due to the monotonicity of the logistic
regression, which cannot control the loop parts of the model. However, the overall
error decreases with our method.
5 Related Works
The determination of the activity probabilities in simulation model is related
to stochastic process discovery [3,10,15]. However, they do not focus on build-
ing simulation models, nor do they verify whether or not their approaches are
beneﬁcial to increase the accuracy of business simulation models. In particu-
lar, Burke et al. use a similar concept of weights to determine probabilities [ 3],
but, instead of using a more elaborated process state, they only consider the
occurrences of previous activities, which our experiments show to not always be
beneﬁcial. Mannhardt et al. also use weights to determine probabilities [ 3], but
they only focus on process attributes, which is similarly not always beneﬁcial
for more accurate simulation models. This paper brings together the works by
Burket et al. and by Mannhardt et al. allowing both process-state abstractions,
their combination, and also richer abstraction (e.g., includining resource and
time information).
Related work also focuses on Markov-based stochastic models [ 2,16]. This
class of models is, however, unable to feature concurrency, data and silent tran-
sitions, which are all crucial aspects of business process models, including when
used for simulation.
On the other hand, several studies have been conducted in the simulation
domain to discover and improve simulation models. However, none of these works
have focused on discovering accurate activity ﬁring probabilities. In [12], Pouar-
bafrani et al. proposed a framework with a simulation tool for enriched process
trees, and in [14], the authors used historical execution data to provide simulation
models. However, in these works, the probability of an activity occurring is not
dependent on the data states. Camargo et al. proposed hybrid approaches using
Deep Learning techniques to generate simulated logs in [ 6,7], but the control
ﬂow depends on constant branching probabilities that do not consider the data

===== PAGE 16 / 18 =====

Inﬂuence of Data-Aware Process States on Activity Probabilities 143
and history. In [4,5], Simod has been introduced as a framework for the auto-
mated discovery of simulation models, but the activity ﬁring probabilities are
again based on branching probabilities. GenCPN [13] was proposed as a tool that
extracts process parameters, including constant branching probabilities, directly
from an event log and uses Process Mining techniques to convert them into
a CPN model. However, these simulators use constant branching probabilities,
which are not dependent on process states.
6 Conclusions
Business process simulation is a ﬂexible approach to analyze operational pro-
cesses, and, when diﬀerent sorts of issues are observed, to evaluate alternative
scenarios wit the aim to overcome them. The advantage of business process
simulation is that the evaluation is performed through the digital twin of the
actual process, and hence these alternative scenarios are assessed without risk-
ing them in real production environments. Of course, the requisite of valuable
applications of process simulations is that this digital twin is an accurate rep-
resentation of the real process. The digital twin is modelled through a process
simulation model, which hence needs to be accurate in order to proﬁt from the
advantage of simulation.
A process simulation model consists of the actual model of the process to be
simulated that is extended with the run-time characterization of the process (case
arrival rate, resources and roles, activity durations, etc.). While a large body of
research has recently been carried out to create accurate simulation models,
an accurate stochastic modelling of activity ﬁrings in these models has been
totally overlooked (cf. Sect.5): it is simply assumed that these probabilities can
be well determined by looking at the frequency of occurrence of these activities
in the log (e.g., the so-called branching probabilities). Unfortunately, this is
a coarse determination because the activity ﬁring probabilities usually depend
on characteristics of the single process instances that are simulated, and these
characteristics might signiﬁcant change from instance to instance. For example,
the chance of executing the activity to reject a loan application might depend
on the amount requested and/on the number of further clariﬁcation requests.
This paper aims to assess whether our intuition that a more accurate mod-
elling of the activity ﬁring probabilities passes on having them depend on the
process state, which models the characteristics of the cases. To answer this ques-
tion, we compute the weights of activities as function of the process state, where
these weights are proportional to the activity ﬁring probability. The technique
has been operationalized using stochastic labelled Data Petri nets, a simple lan-
guage, yet suﬃciently expressive to model weights, probabilities, and process
states. Each Petri-net transition is associated to a weight function: weights are
then computed by evaluate the weight functions on the current process state.
Since the process state is in fact an abstraction, we make it customizable as
function of the process to simulate. Indeed, these probabilities are possibly linked
to diﬀerent process characteristics, depending on the process to simulate. We

===== PAGE 17 / 18 =====

144 M. de Leoni et al.
conducted experiments with two diﬀerent process and ﬁve alternative process-
state deﬁnition to answer our business questions. The results conﬁrm that our
weight-based estimation of activity-ﬁring probabilities allowed us to build more
accurate simulation models, and that the best process-state abstraction changes
with the process to simulate.
Currently, weight functions are synthesized using logistic regression, which
imposes a certain shape of the function. This has also caused the livelock problem
in simulation discussed in Sect. 4.3, because it was not possible to synthesize a
suitable weight function when the process state includes the history. As a future
work, we aim to replace the synthesis based on logistic regression with alternative
synthesis methods, which possibly can return better approximations of the real
weight function. Also, we aim to asses how ﬁtness and precision of the process
models inﬂuence the quality of the simulations.
Acknowledgment. The research is ﬁnancially supported by MUR (PNRR) and Uni-
versity of Padua, by the Department of Mathematics of University of Padua, through
the BIRD project “Data-driven Business Process Improvement” (codeBIRD215924/21),
and by the “Smart Journey Mining project” funded by the Research Council of Norway
(grant no. 312198).
References
1. van der Aalst, W.M.P., Adriansyah, A., van Dongen, B.F.: Replaying history on
process models for conformance checking and performance analysis. WIREs Data
Mining Knowl. Discov. 2(2), 182–192 (2012)
2. Baier, C., Katoen, J.: Principles of Model Checking. MIT Press, Cambridge (2008)
3. Burke, A., Leemans, S.J.J., Wynn, M.T.: Stochastic process discovery by weight
estimation. In: Leemans, S., Leopold, H. (eds.) ICPM 2020. LNBIP, vol. 406, pp.
260–272. Springer, Cham (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-72693-5
20
4. Camargo, M., Dumas, M., Gonz´ alez, O.: Automated discovery of business pro-
cess simulation models from event logs. Decis. Support Syst. 134, 113284 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2020.113284
5. Camargo, M., Dumas, M., Rojas, O.G.: SIMOD: a tool for automated discovery
of business process simulation models. In: Proceedings of the Dissertation Award,
Doctoral Consortium, and Demonstration Track at BPM 2019 co-located with 17th
International Conference on Business Process Management, BPM 2019, Vienna,
Austria, 1–6 September 2019. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2420, pp. 139–
143. CEUR-WS.org (2019). https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2420/paperDT5.pdf
6. Camargo, M., Dumas, M., Rojas, O.G.: Discovering generative models from event
logs: data-driven simulation vs deep learning. PeerJ Comput. Sci. 7, e577 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.577
7. Camargo, M., Dumas, M., Rojas, O.G.: Learning accurate business process simu-
lation models from event logs via automated process discovery and deep learning.
In: Franch, X., Poels, G., Gailly, F., Snoeck, M. (eds.) Advanced Information Sys-
tems Engineering - 34th International Conference, CAiSE 2022. LNCS, vol. 13295,
pp. 55–71. Springer, Cham (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07472-1
4,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07472-1 4

===== PAGE 18 / 18 =====

Inﬂuence of Data-Aware Process States on Activity Probabilities 145
8. Leemans, S.J.J., Syring, A.F., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Earth movers’ stochas-
tic conformance checking. In: Hildebrandt, T., van Dongen, B., R¨ oglinger, M.,
Mendling, J. (eds.) Business Process Management Forum - BPM Forum 2019.
LNIBP, vol. 360, pp. 127–143. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-26643-1
8
9. Mannhardt, F.: Multi-perspective process mining. Ph.D. thesis, Mathematics and
Computer Science (2018). proefschrift
10. Mannhardt, F., Leemans, S.J.J., Schwanen, C.T., de Leoni, M.: Modelling data-
aware stochastic processes - discovery and conformance checking. In: Gomes, L.,
Lorenz, R. (eds.) Application and Theory of Petri Nets and Concurrency. PETRI
NETS 2023. LNCS, vol. 13929, pp. 77–98. Springer, Cham (2023).https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-031-33620-1 5
11. Mannhardt, F., de Leoni, M., Reijers, H.A.: The multi-perspective process explorer.
In: Proceedings of the BPM Demo Session 2015 Co-located with the 13th Inter-
national Conference on Business Process Management (BPM 2015), Innsbruck,
Austria, September 2, 2015. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 1418, pp. 130–
134. CEUR-WS.org (2015). http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1418/paper27.pdf
12. Pourbafrani, M., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Interactive process improvement using
simulation of enriched process trees. In: Hacid, H., et al. (eds.) Service-Oriented
Computing - ICSOC 2021 Workshops, vol. 13236. LNCS, pp. 61–76. Springer Inter-
national Publishing, Cham (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-14135-5
5
13. Pourbafrani, M., Balyan, S., Ahmed, M., Chugh, S., van der Aalst, W.M.P.:
GenCPN: automatic CPN model generation of processes. In: Proceedings of the
ICPM Doctoral Consortium and Demo Track 2021 co-located with 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Process Mining, ICPM Doctoral Consortium / Demo Track
2021, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, November 2021. CEUR Workshop Proceedings,
vol. 3098, pp. 23–24 (2021). http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3098/demo
192.pdf
14. Pourbafrani, M., van Zelst, S.J., van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Supporting automatic
system dynamics model generation for simulation in the context of process mining.
In: Abramowicz, W., Klein, G. (eds.) Business Information Systems - BIS 2020.
LNBIP, vol. 389, pp. 249–263. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-53337-3
19
15. Rogge-Solti, A., van der Aalst, W.M.P., Weske, M.: Discovering stochastic petri
nets with arbitrary delay distributions from event logs. In: Lohmann, N., Song, M.,
Wohed, P. (eds.) BPM 2013. LNBIP, vol. 171, pp. 15–27. Springer, Cham (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-06257-0
2
16. Rogge-Solti, A., Weske, M.: Prediction of business process durations using non-
Markovian stochastic petri nets. Inf. Syst. 54, 1–14 (2015). https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.is.2015.04.004
17. Witten, I.H., Frank, E., Hall, M.A.: Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning
Tools and Techniques, 3rd edn. Morgan Kaufmann, Elsevier (2011)